GOOD API DESIGN — INTERACTIVE COURSE
====================================

===============
GOOD API DESIGN
===============


  An opinionated course built on Sean Goedecke's essay — and on the places the
  field, the standards bodies, and his own employer disagree with him.

    10 modules
    1 decision simulator
    ~90 min
    Aug 2026 verified

  Spine text:
  Everything I know about good API design
  — Sean Goedecke, 24 August 2025


  How to read this course
  This is not a summary. Goedecke's essay is the spine — his arguments are
  stated in his own words and clearly attributed. But an essay is one practitioner's cost model, and
  a course that only restates a blog post teaches you to agree rather than to decide.
  So every module carries three kinds of block. Goedecke's position
  is what he actually argued. Where the field disagrees is
  sourced pushback — from the HN and Reddit threads, from Fielding, Google, Zalando, Stripe,
  GitHub, and the RFCs. Verified marks facts checked
  against live primary sources in August 2026, because half of what circulates about API design is
  stale and some of it is fabricated.
  Module 4 is a simulator. Do it before you read modules 5–10 — it will make you commit
  to judgments you'd rather defer, which is the entire skill.



--------------
Course Modules
--------------



      1. What "good" actually meansFoundations

      2. Resource modelling & namingDesign

      3. We do not break userspaceCompatibility

      4. Versioning — The Change DeskSimulator

      5. ErrorsStandards

      6. PaginationScale

      7. Idempotency & retriesCorrectness

      8. Auth, rate limits & blast radiusSafety

      9. Deprecation — the long goodbyeLifecycle

      10. GraphQL, DX & what really decidesSynthesis




------------------------------------
Module 1: What "good" actually means
------------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * State the familiarity/flexibility tension that generates almost every API design argument

    * Explain why an API is harder to change than the system behind it

    * Place HATEOAS and "real REST" accurately — including what Fielding actually conceded

    * Argue both sides of "API quality is a marginal feature"


The tension that generates everything else
----------------------------------------


An API has two masters and they want opposite things. The people building it want flexibility,
because they'll have to live with this interface for years. The people using it want familiarity,
because the API is not their goal — it's an obstacle between them and their goal.

Goedecke's position
"Good APIs are boring. An API that's interesting is a bad API (or at
least it would be a better one if it were less interesting). […] From their perspective, an
ideal API should be so familiar that they will more or less know how to use it before they read any
documentation."
This is continuous with his systems writing. In Everything I know about good system design
he puts it more bluntly: "Paradoxically, good design is self-effacing: bad design is often
more impressive than good. I'm always suspicious of impressive-looking systems." His stated
enemy is advice optimised for social engagement — "the LinkedIn-optimized 'bet you never heard
of queues' style of post."


The second half of the tension is the one that makes APIs a distinct discipline: APIs are
hard to change. You can rewrite the service behind an endpoint on a Tuesday. You cannot
rename a field in its response without breaking every consumer who reads that field. That asymmetry
— cheap internals, expensive interface — is why API design deserves care that most
internal code does not.


Where "real REST" fits
----------------------


Goedecke is dismissive of the REST purity debate: "People get wrapped up in what 'real' REST is,
or whether HATEOAS is a good idea." He's largely right, but the reason is more interesting than the
dismissal.

Roy Fielding coined REST in his dissertation and has been unambiguous that most things called REST
are not:

"I am getting frustrated by the number of people calling any HTTP-based interface a REST
API. […] That is RPC. It screams RPC. There is so much coupling on display
that it should be given an X rating." […] "if the engine of application state (and hence the
API) is not being driven by hypertext, then it cannot be RESTful and cannot be a REST API.
Period."
Roy Fielding, REST APIs must be hypertext-driven, 20 October 2008

But two days later, in his own comment thread, he conceded the point that dissolves the whole
argument:

"That doesn't mean that I think everyone should design their own systems according to the
REST architectural style. REST is intended for long-lived network-based applications that span
multiple organizations. If you don't see a need for the constraints, then don't use them.
That's fine with me as long as you don't call the result a REST API."
Roy Fielding, same comment thread, 22 October 2008

Verified — the empirical picture
Bülthoff & Maleshkova manually analysed 45 of the most-used web APIs
(arXiv:1902.10514, 2019):
"HATEOAS remains one of the most poorly supported constraints of the REST architecture with
less than a fifth of the analyzed Web APIs providing links to related resources." Self-links
and pagination links appeared in only 13%. Their conclusion: "they most commonly
remain RESTless."
Kin Lane's framing is the honest epitaph: "Hypermedia is the most intellectually compelling
and most commercially frustrating idea in the entire API design world […] the market
chose simple, RPC-flavored, URL-based REST over the more correct but more demanding hypermedia
approach."


So the dispute is terminological, not architectural. Fielding isn't saying your API is
broken; he's saying stop calling it REST. Goedecke's practical stance and Fielding's 2008 concession
are compatible.


The Richardson Maturity Model, correctly cited


You will meet the "four levels of REST" ladder — Level 0 (HTTP as an RPC tunnel), Level 1
(Resources), Level 2 (HTTP Verbs), Level 3 (Hypermedia Controls). It is a teaching heuristic,
and both its originator and its populariser said so.

Cite it accurately
Martin Fowler, who popularised it (18 March 2010):
"I should stress that the RMM, while a good way to think about what the elements of REST, is
not a definition of levels of REST itself. […] As such I see it as a tool to help us
learn about the concepts and not something that should be used in some kind of assessment
mechanism."
Leonard Richardson, in the original 2008 QCon talk, called it a maturity heuristic and
noted: "A lot of people settle for level two because hypermedia is difficult to understand and
its value in the web service domain isn't as clear."
Two things people get wrong: the phrase "the Swamp of POX" appears only in Fowler's diagram,
never in his prose; and Fielding's famous "evoke an image" passage is dissertation Chapter 6
§6.1, not Chapter 5.


The uncomfortable claim: API quality is marginal
----------------------------------------


Goedecke's position
"Nobody uses an API because the API itself is so elegantly designed. They use it to
interact with your product. If your product is valuable enough, users will flock to
even a terrible API. […] Facebook and Jira are famous for having appalling APIs, but
it doesn't matter."
He draws a sharp corollary: "API quality is a marginal feature: it only matters when a consumer is
choosing between two basically-equivalent products." But the presence of an API is different
— having none at all is a real problem.


This drew zero pushback across 160 Hacker News comments and 55 Reddit comments.
Nobody defended Jira's or Facebook's API. It is the least controversial claim in the essay, which is
itself notable given how much effort the industry spends on API polish.

Where the field disagrees
The claim is true and also load-bearing in a way that should worry you. If API quality only matters
at the margin, then the marginal case is every case where you are not a monopoly —
which is most companies most of the time. "Facebook gets away with it" is an argument available to
almost nobody reading this.
There is also a measurable proxy the essay misses, and it was the single most-agreed-with
addition in the HN thread:
"The quality of the API is inversely correlated to how difficult it is to obtain
API documentation. If you are only going to get the API documentation after signing a
contract, just assume it's dismally bad."HN commenter JimDabell


Before you continue — commit to an answer
You maintain an internal service that three teams call. Someone proposes publishing it as a public
partner API next quarter. What single property of the current design should you check first,
and why that one before any other?
A defensible
answer: whether the resources you expose are your domain's nouns or your
database's nouns. Everything else on this list — errors, pagination, versioning, auth
— is a bolt-on you can add later without a redesign. Resource shape is the one thing you cannot
change afterwards without breaking every consumer, and it is what Module 2 is about. If you answered
"authentication," that is a reasonable second: it's changeable, but changing it is a migration.


Takeaways
    * API design is a search for the point where familiarity and flexibility hurt least. Boring wins because familiarity is worth more to your users than elegance is to you.

    * Internals are cheap to change; interfaces are not. That asymmetry is the whole discipline.

    * Fielding conceded in 2008 that not using REST's constraints is fine — just don't call it REST. Under a fifth of top APIs implement HATEOAS.

    * The Richardson ladder is a heuristic its own authors declined to use as an assessment tool.

    * "API quality is marginal" is empirically strong and strategically dangerous: the margin is where most companies live.


-------------------------------------
Module 2: Resource modelling & naming
-------------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * Recognise when an API is leaking internal structure instead of modelling a domain

    * Apply the "model the transaction as a resource" move to operations that don't fit CRUD

    * Use a defensible naming convention and know why the convention matters more than the choice

    * Judge the strongest criticism of the essay: that "fix the product" is an abdication


Bad products make bad APIs
--------------------------


Goedecke's position
"A technically-poor product can make it nearly impossible to build an elegant
API. That's because API design usually tracks the 'basic resources' of a product […]
When those resources are set up awkwardly, that makes the API awkward as well."
His example: a blog that stores comments as an in-memory linked list. The naive REST mapping leaks
the list structure straight into the wire format —


The leak, in three stages

---code---
# Stage 1 — the internal pointer becomes public API
GET /comments/1
→ { "id": 1, "body": "...", "next_comment_id": 2 }

# Stage 2 — worse: the whole structure, nested
GET /comments
→ { "body": "...", "next_comment": { "body": "...", "next_comment": {...} } }

# Stage 3 — the traversal cost surfaces as an async job the caller must orchestrate
POST /comments/fetch_job/1   → { "job_id": 589 }
GET  /comments_job/589      → { "status": "complete", "comments": [...] }
---/code---


His diagnosis is exactly right: "Technical constraints that can be cleverly hidden in the UI
are laid bare in the API, forcing API consumers to understand far more of the system design
than they should reasonably have to."

Where the field disagrees — the sharpest critique of the whole essay
"Yeah, almost like you have to design an API, not just make it a proxy for
gory technical details. Strangely, the article recommends fixing technical details (which is
not always possible within a reasonable timeframe), instead of spending time on figuring out good
APIs."Reddit u/katafrakt, 64 upvotes — the highest-voted
criticism in either thread
This is the accusation that the claim is an abdication. If a bad internal model
unavoidably produces a bad API, the API designer has no job. But the API layer's entire purpose is to
be a translation — a published contract about your domain, not a window onto your schema. In the
comment example you do not need to fix the linked list. You need to decide that the public resource is
a thread with a paginated collection of comments, and then do whatever internal work
that costs.
The synthesis: he's describing a real gravitational pull and calling it a law.
Treat it as a warning about what happens by default, not as permission.


The move that unblocks awkward operations
----------------------------------------


The most useful idea in the discourse wasn't in the essay. A long Reddit sub-thread argued that
resource-oriented design fundamentally cannot express transactions — that you inevitably end up
with "a billion endpoints for every imaginable usecase."

Two replies reframed it: "you're missing an axiom… (REST) APIs should be atomic. If
you're doing complex transactional stuff, it's probably the wrong paradigm" (u/XtremeGoose),
and more bluntly, "You gotta stop thinking the API is a database, man"
(u/utdconsq). The resolution the original poster accepted:

The pattern: model the operation itself as a resource
Instead of a verb endpoint that does several things at once, POST a
request entity that is itself listable, gettable, and has a lifecycle.


Verb endpoint vs. operation-as-resource

---code---
// Awkward: an RPC verb wearing a REST costume. No handle, no status,
// no retry story, no audit trail.
POST /accounts/42/close_and_refund_and_notify

// Better: the operation is a thing that exists, and can be inspected.
POST /account-closures
  { "account": "42", "refund": true, "notify": true }
→ 202 { "id": "clo_9f2", "state": "pending", "account": "42" }

GET  /account-closures/clo_9f2   // status, failure reason, partial progress
GET  /account-closures?state=failed
---/code---


Fielding got there in 2008 from the opposite direction: "If you find yourself in need of a
batch operation, then most likely you just haven't defined enough resources." A Reddit
thread in 2025 reinvented it independently. That convergence is a good sign you should trust the
pattern.


Naming: pick a convention, then stop thinking about it
----------------------------------------


Goedecke says nothing about naming, which is consistent with his thesis — naming is exactly
the kind of thing that generates enormous discussion and very little value, as long as you are
consistent. Inconsistency is the actual defect. Zalando's guidelines, one of the two most complete
public style guides, fix all three casings so nobody has to argue:


Where	|	Casing	|	Example	|	Rule
URL path segments	|	kebab-case	|	/shipment-orders/{id}	|	#129
JSON properties	|	snake_case	|	customer_number	|	#118
Query parameters	|	snake_case	|	?created_after=	|	#130
HTTP headers	|	Kebab-Case-Uppercase	|	X-Flow-Id	|	#132
Resource names	|	plural nouns	|	/orders, not /order	|	#134


Their stated reason for snake_case is pure familiarity, which is Goedecke's own
argument: "many popular Internet companies prefer snake_case: e.g. GitHub, Stack Exchange,
Twitter." Google's AIPs choose differently (lowerCamelCase in JSON). Both are
fine. Picking neither is not.

The one naming rule that is not arbitrary
Google AIP-180: "A resource MUST NOT change its name. Unlike most breaking changes, this
affects major versions as well." Casing is taste. The identity of a resource is a contract
that survives even your version boundaries — a /v2 that renames
/customers to /clients is not a new version, it's a new API.


Takeaways
    * APIs default to leaking internal structure. Noticing the leak is the job; "the product is bad" is a description, not an excuse.

    * When an operation doesn't fit CRUD, make the operation a resource with an id, a state, and a history. You get status, retries, and audit for free.

    * Fielding's rule of thumb: needing a batch endpoint usually means you haven't defined enough resources.

    * Naming conventions are arbitrary; consistency is not. Resource identity is a contract that outlives versions.


-----------------------------------
Module 3: We do not break userspace
-----------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * Classify changes as additive, breaking, or "technically additive but actually breaking"

    * State the missing half of Torvalds' rule and why it makes the norm usable

    * Apply the tolerant-reader discipline and the asymmetric enum rule

    * Write down a stability contract instead of assuming one


Goedecke's position
"As a maintainer of an API, you have something like a sacred duty to avoid harming
your downstream consumers. […] You should never make a change to an API just because
it'd be neater, or because it's a little awkward. The 'referer' header in the HTTP specification is
famously a misspelling of the word 'referrer', but they haven't changed it, because we do not
break userspace."
He also stakes out a position on tolerance: consumers that break when they receive
extra fields are, in his word, "irresponsible." "You should expect API consumers to ignore
unexpected fields."


The missing half
----------------


The top-voted comment in the entire Hacker News thread does not disagree with him. It completes
him, and it's the most useful sentence in the discourse:

Where the field disagrees — the essential correction
"The reminder to 'never break userspace' is good, but people never bring up the other half
of that statement: 'we can and will break kernel APIs without warning'. It
illustrates that the reminder isn't 'never change an API in a way that breaks someone', it's the more
nuanced 'declare what's stable, and never break those'."
HN dwattttt — top comment in the thread
Supporting evidence from the same thread: glibc breaks ABI "all the time"; Linux famously has no
stable in-kernel driver API, which several commenters noted was a motivation for Google's Fuchsia.
Why this matters practically: "never break anything" is unimplementable, so people
either violate it and feel bad, or freeze and ship nothing. "Publish a stability contract, then honour
it absolutely" is implementable. It converts a moral stance into an engineering artifact — and
it tells you which parts of your surface you are still allowed to move.


The change classification you should steal
----------------------------------------


GitHub publishes the clearest list, and it is worth internalising because roughly half of these
surprise people:


Additive — safe in all versions
Adding an operation · adding an optional parameter · adding an optional request header
· adding a response field · adding a response header · adding enum values
GitHub ships these to every supported
version without a version bump.
Breaking — requires a version
Removing an operation · removing or renaming a parameter · removing or renaming a
response field · adding a required parameter · making an optional parameter required
· changing a parameter or field's type · removing enum values ·
adding a new validation rule to an existing parameter · changing auth
requirements


The traps in that list
Adding a validation rule is breaking. Requests that used to succeed now 4xx. This
is the single most commonly shipped accidental break, because it doesn't change the schema and
therefore doesn't feel like a change.
Enums are asymmetric — and Zalando's rule #107 is the sharpest formulation
anywhere: "For schemas used in input only: enum ranges can be
extended. For schemas used in output only: enum ranges cannot
be extended — clients may not be prepared to handle it." Adding
status: "partially_refunded" to a response is additive on paper and a production
incident in a client's switch statement.
Google AIP-180 goes further still, and these will catch you: ceasing to populate a
field you used to populate is breaking; changing a default value is breaking;
changing a field's format or algorithm is breaking "even if the field is
OUTPUT_ONLY"; and as of October 2025, increasing a string length limit
is breaking.


Tolerant reader — the discipline that makes additive changes safe
----------------------------------------


Goedecke's "consumers should ignore unexpected fields" is Postel's Law, and Zalando operationalises
it into rules you can put in a code review checklist:


Rule	|	What it requires
#108 — Tolerant reader	|	"Be tolerant with unknown fields in the payload… ignore new fields but do not eliminate them from payload if needed for subsequent PUT requests."
#108 — Unknown status codes	|	"Be prepared to handle HTTP status codes not explicitly specified… Default handling is how you would treat the corresponding 2xx code." (per RFC 9110)
#111 — Keep schemas open	|	"API formats must not declare additionalProperties to be false, as this prevents objects being extended in the future."
#106 — The contract	|	"APIs are contracts between service providers and service consumers that cannot be broken via unilateral decisions."


The PUT clause in #108 is the subtle one. A client that strips unknown fields on read
and then PUTs the object back will silently delete data it never understood.
That's a data-loss bug caused by an additive change — the API owner did nothing wrong and the
customer is still down.

Verified — the compatibility axes you're actually promising
Google AIP-180 names three: source, wire, and
semantic compatibility, and covers all three. Zalando explicitly covers only the wire
format: "the compatibility guarantees are for the 'on the wire' format. Binary or source
compatibility of code generated from an API specification is not covered."
If you ship SDKs, you are on the hook for source compatibility whether you said so or not. Decide
which of the three you promise, and write it down. That is dwattttt's point made concrete.


Commit before revealing — is this change breaking?
Your GET /orders/{id} response includes "total": "42.00". Finance asks
you to return more precision: "total": "42.0000". The type is unchanged (still a string),
no field is added or removed, no validation changes. Ship it?
No — this is
breaking, on two of the three axes. Google AIP-180 classifies changing "the format or
algorithm of an existing field's value" as breaking, and explicitly says "Doing so requires a new API
version." Concretely: clients doing string comparison against a stored value now mismatch on every
record; clients with a DECIMAL(10,2) column now truncate or error; and any client that
displays the raw string now shows customers $42.0000. Nothing in your schema changed and
you have broken your users. This is why "is the schema the same?" is the wrong question — the
right one is "could a reasonable client have depended on what I just changed?"

Takeaways
    * The norm is not "never change anything." It's declare what's stable, then never break that — Torvalds' rule has a second half.

    * Additive means additive for the client: new validation rules, new response enum values, and format changes all break people while looking safe.

    * Tolerant readers make additive evolution possible. Closed schemas (additionalProperties: false) foreclose it.

    * A client that strips unknown fields and PUTs the object back causes data loss from a change you were entitled to make. Document round-trip expectations.

    * Pick your compatibility axes — wire, source, semantic — and publish which you guarantee.


--------------------------------------
Module 4: Versioning — The Change Desk
--------------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * Make a versioning call under uncertainty and defend it before seeing the outcome

    * Recognise that deferring a breaking change does not delete it — it queues it

    * Compare URL, header, media-type and per-change versioning against real published schemes

    * Judge why Google mandates /v1 in the path and Zalando forbids it


Goedecke's position
"I don't like API versioning. I think at best it's a necessary evil, but
it's still evil. It's confusing to users… And it's a nightmare for maintainers. If you
have thirty API endpoints, every new version you add introduces thirty new endpoints to maintain.
[…] In short, you should only use API versioning as a last resort."
He acknowledges Stripe's translation-layer approach and notes, correctly, that such abstractions
leak — citing a 2017 HN comment from a Stripe employee saying some version changes need
conditional logic in core code.


This attracted roughly 60% of all comments across both threads, and the critics did
not agree with each other — which is the best evidence that this is a genuine tradeoff and not a
solved problem.

Where the field disagrees — three incompatible attacks
1. The cost math assumes the wrong unit.
"This means he's literally versioning every single one when he changes a single endpoint.
What should be done is you only create a new version for the endpoint that has
changed… Overall, I wouldn't trust API designs from someone who just bumps the version
number for everything every time they change a single endpoint."
Reddit u/Sir_KnowItAll, 99 upvotes — top comment on Reddit
2. No — per-endpoint versioning is worse. The same thread split hard:
"Absolutely not. That's version hell. I want clients using specific
versions of the api. New api version for all endpoints. If many of them have no changes, great."
Reddit u/mpanase, 58 upvotes
"versioning every API endpoint independently can [be] maddening in it's own ways.
you can't talk about the version of the 'system' very cohesively"
Reddit u/bzbub2, 68 upvotes
3. The URL is the wrong place entirely — the most technically substantive
objection:
"In a REST API, the URL is the primary key. If Client A holds a copy of
/v1/foo/1 and Client B holds a copy of /v2/foo/1 then as far as HTTP and
REST are concerned, those are two different resources and the clients cannot
interoperate."HN JimDabell


Now make the calls yourself
---------------------------


Reading about a versioning tradeoff is not the same as making one. Below is a simulator. It gives
you five change requests of the kind that actually land on an API owner's desk, and it will not let
you see any consequence until you have committed to a decision and written down why.

It is not a quiz — several options are defensible and the reveal shows you what
every option would have done, not just yours. But it keeps a debt ledger.
Choices that avoid a break by carrying something forever accumulate there, and in the fifth scenario
the bill comes due, scaled to what you actually accrued. That second-order effect is the part the
essay leaves out.



    Simulator

The Change Desk
---------------


    Scenario 1 of 5






      Deprecation debt carried 0
        * Nothing carried yet. Anything you defer instead of resolving lands here.















      Your reasoning — one line, required before you can run it forward







      Pick an option and write one line of reasoning to unlock.





      Your decision ledger







Transfer check — a case the simulator never ran


  This one is deliberately outside everything above: it is not a versioning
  decision, and none of the five scenarios showed you the mechanism involved. Answer from the
  principles, not from pattern-matching. Write your answers first — the reveal is below them.

  1. You consume a partner's /payouts API. You
  switch on payout.status, which has always been one of
  pending | paid | failed. This morning they added reversed and your
  reconciliation job crashed on 1,400 records. They say the change was additive and therefore
  non-breaking. Who is right?


  2. Name the single documented rule that would have prevented this,
  and say which side of the contract it binds.


  3. You now own that partner API. Product needs a sixth status next
  quarter. What do you change about the API — not the process — so this cannot recur?


  Reveal — and where reasonable people still split
  1. Both are partly right, and the asymmetry is the answer. Adding an enum value
  to a field that appears in a request is genuinely additive. Adding one to a field that
  appears in a response is not, because the client already shipped an exhaustive
  switch. GitHub lists "removing enum values" as breaking but treats adding them as
  additive — which is why GitHub's own classification is insufficient here. Google AIP-180 is
  more careful: enum values "MAY be freely added to enums which are only used in request
  messages… Enums used in response messages… MAY still be added; however,
  appropriate caution SHOULD be used."
  2. Zalando rule #107 — "For schemas used in input only:
  enum ranges can be extended. For schemas used in output only: enum
  ranges cannot be extended — clients may not be prepared to handle it." It binds
  the provider. Its companion #108 (tolerant reader) binds the consumer: "Be prepared
  to handle HTTP status codes not explicitly specified… Default handling is how you would treat
  the corresponding 2xx code." A robust client has a default: arm. Both
  sides owed something here, which is exactly why "who broke whom" is the wrong first question.
  3. Change the type, not the values. The design defect is that a closed enum was
  published for a field whose value set was always going to grow. The fix is to document
  status as an open string with a known-values list and state in the
  contract that clients must tolerate unknown values — then adding a sixth is genuinely
  additive. Two other defensible answers: return a coarse stable enum
  (terminal | in_flight) alongside a fine-grained detail string, so clients switch on the
  stable one; or version the field's type once, now, and never again.
  Where this is still argued: open enums push the cost onto every consumer,
  including the non-engineers Goedecke spends the essay defending, and they make code generation
  weaker — a generated client can no longer give you an exhaustiveness check, which is one of the
  real benefits of a typed API. There is no free option. That is the point.



What the published schemes actually do
--------------------------------------


Scheme	|	Mechanism	|	Status, Aug 2026
Stripe	|	Date + plant-name release trains, per-account pinning, version-change modules replayed backwards	|	2026-07-29.dahlia. Major (breaking) twice a year; monthly additive releases. ~100 backwards-incompatible upgrades since 2011 — and zero versions ever retired.
GitHub	|	Date in an X-GitHub-Api-Version header	|	Two versions: 2022-11-28 and 2026-03-10. Previous supported "at least 24 more months"; unsupported returns 410 Gone.
Twilio	|	Date in the URL, frozen	|	api.twilio.com/2010-04-01/ — unchanged for ~16 years. But every product launched since has its own v1/v2.
Google AIP-185	|	Major version in the path	|	"All Google API interfaces MUST provide a major version number… included as the first part of the URI path for REST APIs." Minor/patch numbers MUST NOT be exposed.
Zalando #113/#115	|	Media-type versioning with content negotiation	|	"MUST NOT use URL versioning." And: "As we discourage versioning by all means because of the manifold disadvantages…"


The fact that should end the argument
The two most respected published API style guides flatly contradict each other.
Google mandates the version in the URL path. Zalando forbids the version in the URL path. Both are
maintained, current, and used at scale. Goedecke's dislike of versioning is therefore a legitimate
contested position, not an error — and anyone who tells you there is one correct answer here has
read one of these documents and not the other.


Where Goedecke's cost model actually breaks down
----------------------------------------


"Thirty endpoints × N versions" is the strongest-sounding part of his argument and the weakest part
under inspection, because nobody serious versions that way. Stripe's model is neither
per-endpoint nor per-API — it is per-change, composed. A "version" is just a date that
selects how many transformation modules to replay:

Stripe's mechanism, in shape

---code---
// One module per breaking change, ever. Not per endpoint, not per version.
const changes = [
  { since: "2024-09-30", downgrade(res) { res.amount_cents = res.amount * 100 } },
  { since: "2025-03-31", downgrade(res) { res.customer = res.customer.id } },
  // ...~100 of these, accumulated since 2011
];

// Serving an old client = replay the modules newer than their pinned date, backwards.
function serialize(res, clientVersion) {
  return changes
    .filter(c => c.since > clientVersion)
    .reverse()
    .reduce((r, c) => (c.downgrade(r), r), res);
}
---/code---


Cost scales with the number of breaking changes you have ever made, not with
endpoints × versions. That dissolves his arithmetic — but it does not dissolve his conclusion,
because that machinery is expensive to build, and Brandur Leach's own account concedes the leak
Goedecke cites. His cost claim is validated. His inference from it is not the one Stripe drew.

Takeaways
    * Versioning is genuinely contested: Google mandates URL versions, Zalando forbids them, both are current and serious.

    * "Endpoints × versions" is the wrong cost model. Per-change composition scales with breaking changes made, not surface area.

    * Not versioning does not avoid the cost — it defers it. GitHub's 2026 version exists because a decade of deprecations had nowhere else to go.

    * Version in a header or media type rather than the path if you want clients holding different versions to still be talking about the same resource.

    * If you version, the hard part isn't the mechanism. It's committing to a support window and honouring it.


----------------
Module 5: Errors
----------------


Learning objectives
    * Use RFC 9457 problem details correctly, including what it does not standardise

    * Design a stable machine-readable error taxonomy separate from human-readable messages

    * Know when your error strings become part of your API contract


Where the field disagrees — by omission
Goedecke's essay never discusses error formats. This is the clearest gap in it, and the odd thing
is that filling it would have strengthened his thesis. A Standards-Track RFC that obsoleted
its predecessor and ships an IANA registry is precisely the "boring, well-known thing" his own
philosophy demands. It is a free win he didn't take.


RFC 9457, Problem Details for HTTP APIs
---------------------------------------


Verified — status as of August 2026
RFC 9457
— Nottingham, Wilde, Dalal. July 2023. Standards Track (Proposed Standard). Obsoletes
RFC 7807. Media type application/problem+json. If your notes say 7807, they are
three years stale.


application/problem+json

---code---
HTTP/1.1 403 Forbidden
Content-Type: application/problem+json

{
  "type":     "https://example.com/probs/insufficient-funds",
  "title":    "You do not have enough credit.",
  "status":   403,
  "detail":   "Your balance is 30, but the transfer costs 50.",
  "instance": "/account/12345/transactions/msg-abc",

  // extension members are allowed and encouraged
  "balance":  30,
  "accounts": ["/account/12345"]
}
---/code---


Member	|	What the RFC actually says
type	|	"Consumers MUST use the 'type' URI… as the problem type's primary identifier." Absent ⇒ assumed about:blank. But: "consumers SHOULD NOT automatically dereference the type URI."
status	|	"is only advisory… Generators MUST use the same status code in the actual HTTP response."
title	|	"SHOULD NOT change from occurrence to occurrence of the problem, except for localization."
detail	|	"ought to focus on helping the client correct the problem, rather than giving debugging information. Consumers SHOULD NOT parse the 'detail' member."
Type mismatch	|	"If a member's value type does not match the specified type, the member MUST be ignored."


Two things people get wrong about 9457
1. There is no standard errors array. The multi-error array you have
seen in a hundred blog posts appears in 9457 only inside a 422 example the RFC itself labels "the
fictional problem type here." Ship one if you want — just don't tell your team it's
standard.
2. On multiple problems, the RFC recommends the opposite of what most APIs do:
"When an API encounters multiple problems that do not share the same type, it is RECOMMENDED that
the most relevant or urgent problem be represented in the response. While it is
possible to create generic 'batch' problem types… they do not map well into HTTP semantics."
New in 9457 over 7807: an IANA HTTP Problem Types registry
(policy: Specification Required). Note that "vendor-specific, application-specific, and
deployment-specific values are unable to be registered" — the registry is for
genuinely cross-cutting problems, not your business errors.


The stable-taxonomy pattern
---------------------------


Twilio is the model, and it's the most Goedecke-compatible thing in this course: four fields, a
numeric code that has meant the same thing for a decade, and a documentation URL per code.

Twilio error — boring, and unchanged for years

---code---
{
  "status":    400,
  "message":   "No to number is specified",
  "code":      21201,
  "more_info": "http://www.twilio.com/docs/errors/21201"
}
---/code---


The full numeric dictionary is published and downloadable as JSON, with a page per code. That is
what "boring" looks like when someone actually does it.

Verified — Google AIP-193, and the trap inside it
"All error responses MUST include an ErrorInfo within details…
This provides machine-readable identifiers so that users can write code against specific aspects of
the error." The reason field "MUST be at most 63 characters and match
[A-Z][A-Z0-9_]+[A-Z0-9]" — good: CPU_AVAILABILITY, NO_STOCK;
bad: ERROR, THE_BOOK_YOU_WANT_IS_NOT_AVAILABLE.
The trap: "If the RPC has always returned ErrorInfo with
machine-readable information, the content of Status.message MAY change over time…
Otherwise, the content of Status.message MUST be stable." Read that
again. If you never shipped a machine-readable error code, your human-readable error strings
became your API contract, because clients had nothing else to match on — and they are
matching on them right now. Shipping structured error codes is how you buy back the freedom to reword
your own error messages.
One more ordering rule worth stealing: "Permission MUST be checked prior to checking if the
resource or parent exists" — 403 before 404, so your error responses don't become an
existence oracle.


Where the field disagrees — with the RFC
Zalando mandates RFC 9457 (rule #176) and then deliberately breaks one of its recommendations:
"Problem type and instance identifiers in our APIs are not meant to
be resolved. RFC 9457 encourages that problem types are URI references that point to
human-readable documentation, but we deliberately decided against that, as all
important parts of the API must be documented using OpenAPI anyway. In addition, URLs tend to
be fragile and not very stable over longer periods." They use relative refs like
/problems/out-of-stock.
They're right, and it's a nice illustration of adopting a standard's shape without
inheriting a commitment you can't keep for twenty years.
Practical gotcha from the same document: "The media type application/problem+json
is often not implemented as a subset of application/json by libraries! Thus
clients need to include application/problem+json in the Accept header."


Takeaways
    * Use RFC 9457 (July 2023, Standards Track, obsoletes 7807). Don't cite 7807.

    * The errors array is not standardised. The RFC recommends returning the single most urgent problem.

    * Ship a stable machine-readable code alongside the prose. Without one, your prose is the contract.

    * Type URIs need not resolve — Zalando deliberately doesn't resolve theirs, because URLs rot.

    * Check permission before existence, or your 404s leak which resources exist.


--------------------
Module 6: Pagination
--------------------


Learning objectives
    * Explain why offset pagination degrades and cite the actual numbers

    * Name three things cursor pagination cannot do

    * Identify the cursor failure mode that is worse than offset's, because it is silent


Goedecke's position — quoted in full, because the paraphrase is a strawman
"You should always use cursor-based pagination for datasets that might end up being
large. Even though it's harder for consumers to grasp, when you run into scaling problems you
might have to change to cursor-based pagination anyway, and the cost of making that change is
often very high. However, I think it's fine to use page or offset-based pagination
otherwise."
Note the second sentence. He already concedes the offset case. The internet argued with a position
he didn't take.


The performance claim, verified
-------------------------------


Verified — two primary sources
Citus / Microsoft (Five ways to paginate in Postgres),
10M rows, LIMIT 100:

Query	|	Time
OFFSET 0	|	0.059 ms
OFFSET 1,000	|	0.609 ms
OFFSET 5,000,000	|	758.484 ms
WHERE n > 5000000 (keyset)	|	0.119 ms


That is roughly 6,300× at depth. And the objection people raise — "but
my sort column is indexed" — is settled by Sequin:
"It doesn't matter if you have an index on your sort column… it still needs to
walk through the index to count off the offset rows. The operation is still O(n)."


The two shapes

---code---
-- Offset: the database counts past every skipped row, every time.
SELECT * FROM tickets ORDER BY id OFFSET 5000000 LIMIT 10;

-- Keyset: the index seeks straight to the position. Cost is flat.
SELECT * FROM tickets WHERE id > :cursor ORDER BY id LIMIT 10;

-- Real cursors need a tie-breaker, or rows with equal sort keys are
-- skipped or duplicated. This is the part people get wrong.
SELECT * FROM tickets
 WHERE (created_at, id) > (:c_ts, :c_id)   -- row-value comparison
 ORDER BY created_at, id LIMIT 10;
---/code---


That last query does not work on most databases
Markus Winand, the person who has campaigned hardest for keyset pagination, documents the
portability problem: "SQL Server 2017 does not support row values at all. The Oracle
database supports row values in principle, but cannot apply range operators on them (ORA-01796).
MySQL evaluates row value expressions correctly but cannot use them as access predicate during
an index access." Only PostgreSQL and Db2 LUW handle multi-column cursors
properly. On MySQL you must hand-expand the comparison into an OR-chain and verify the plan.


What cursors cost you — from cursor advocates
----------------------------------------


The case for — conceded by everyone
Flat cost at any depth. Handles concurrent inserts and deletes without duplicating or skipping
rows. Google AIP-158: pagination "MUST [be provided] at the outset, as it is
a backwards-incompatible change to add pagination to an existing method."
The case against — also from advocates
Winand: "you also cannot fetch arbitrary pages… you need to reverse all
comparison and sort operations to change the browsing direction." And: "The main reason to
prefer offset over keyset pagination is the lack of tool support."
Citus: "no way to jump directly to a given page… The server will likely need to provide an
endpoint with fixed order rather than allowing the client to customize the ordering."


Where the field disagrees — the failure mode nobody mentions
Everyone knows offset's anomaly: insert a row while someone is paging and they see a duplicate or
miss one. Cursor pagination has a worse one, and it comes from the same post that argues for
cursors:
"Keyset pagination handles deletions gracefully. However, if a row's sort key
changes, the row might appear twice or be skipped.… This problem has plagued
almost every HTTP API I've ever worked with."Sequin, December 2024
Offset's anomaly produces a visible duplicate. Cursor's produces a silently missing
record that the client cannot detect — if you paginate by updated_at and a
row is updated mid-scan, it moves behind your cursor and is simply never returned. Every "our nightly
sync misses a few records and we can't reproduce it" incident is this.
The structural proof that cursors give something up: Relay's Cursor Connections spec
defines PageInfo as exactly hasPreviousPage, hasNextPage,
startCursor, endCursor. There is no total count and no page number
anywhere in the spec. The industry-standard cursor format structurally cannot express "page
51 of 100" or "1,204 results."


Verified — who says "offer both"
Both major style guides do. Google AIP-158 requires opaque tokens
("MUST be opaque… and MUST NOT be user-parseable. This is because if users are able to
deconstruct these, they will do so") but permits skip and
total_size, which "MAY be an estimate." Zalando #160 is only a
SHOULD prefer cursor, and it publishes a four-item trade-off list including: "If jumping to a
particular page in a range (e.g., 51 of 100) is really a required use case, cursor-based
navigation may not be feasible."
Stripe is cursor-only — limit (default 10, max 100),
starting_after, ending_before, has_more. No offset, no page
number, no total.
Two design rules worth stealing regardless: make the token opaque (AIP-158 warns that "Base-64
encoding an otherwise-transparent page token is not a sufficient obfuscation mechanism"),
and ensure "page tokens MUST NOT provide any form of authorization" — a leaked
cursor must not be a leaked capability.


And the user's side of it
"Pagination: do not force me to drink from a paginated coffee stir. I do
not want 640 B of data in a response, and then have to send another response for the next 640 B. And
often, pagination means the calls are serialized, so I'm just doing nothing but waiting for round trip
latency after round trip latency."HN deathanatos
Page-size defaults are a DX decision, not just a database one. A correct cursor implementation with
a default page size of 10 and a max of 25 is still a bad API.


Takeaways
    * The performance case is overwhelming and the objection about indexes is wrong: offset is O(n) regardless.

    * His actual text already concedes offset for small collections. Argue with what he wrote.

    * "Always" is the error: cursors cannot jump to a page, cannot easily browse backwards, cannot express a total, and constrain the sort order.

    * Cursor's silent-skip on sort-key mutation is worse than offset's visible duplicate. Anchor on an immutable key plus a tie-breaker.

    * Add pagination on day one. Adding it later is a breaking change.


-------------------------------
Module 7: Idempotency & retries
-------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * Use the HTTP methods that are already idempotent before reaching for a key

    * Explain why an idempotency key in a side cache is not sufficient

    * Design the three-state machine: first request, retry, concurrent duplicate


Goedecke's position
"The solution is idempotency, which is a fancy word for 'the request should
be safely retriable without creating duplicates.' […] The easiest way is to put them
in Redis or some similar key/value store… For most cases, idempotency should be
optional. […] getting more people on your API is more important than the occasional
duplicated comment from users who didn't read the documentation."
His framing of why it matters is the best thing in the essay: "What if you're transferring some
amount of money? What if you're dispensing medication?"


Correction one: PUT and DELETE are already idempotent
----------------------------------------


He published a correction acknowledging he should have mentioned PUT. The implication is bigger
than the correction.

Verified — RFC 9110 §9.2.2 (June 2022, Internet Standard, STD 97)
"A request method is considered 'idempotent' if the intended effect on the
server of multiple identical requests with that method is the same as the effect for a single such
request. Of the request methods defined by this specification, PUT, DELETE, and safe request
methods are idempotent."
Idempotent: GET, HEAD, OPTIONS, TRACE, PUT, DELETE. Not idempotent:
POST, PATCH, CONNECT.
Also from 9110, and worth putting in your client library: "A client SHOULD NOT
automatically retry a request with a non-idempotent method unless it has some means to know
that the request semantics are actually idempotent," and "A proxy MUST NOT automatically retry
non-idempotent requests."


Why this reframes the whole chapter: if PUT is idempotent for free, then the entire
Idempotency-Key apparatus is only needed for POST and PATCH. A client-generated resource
id plus PUT /transfers/{client_uuid} gets you safe retries with no extra machinery at
all. Reach for the header when you genuinely need POST semantics — not by default.

And a detail he got slightly wrong
The essay says three repeated DELETE comments/32 calls will 404 after the first. A
commenter pushed back: "Many implementations return HTTP 204 for any DELETE that succeeds in
the sense that the element is gone regardless if it had been there before." RFC 9110 backs
the commenter — the definition is about "the intended effect on the server," and the
spec explicitly notes the response may differ. Returning 204 for a repeat DELETE is fully
conformant, and arguably kinder.


Correction two: Redis is not enough
-----------------------------------


He also published a correction on storage, prompted by the sharpest technical comment in the
thread:

"I'm not sure how storing a key in Redis achieves idempotency in all failure cases…
Can't assume that the comment had been created before, since the process could have been
killed in-between storing the key in Redis and actually creating the comment in the database.
An attempt to store idempotency key needs to be atomically committed… together with the
operation payload… For all intents and purposes, the idempotency key is the ID
of the operation being executed."HN achernik

The rule, in one diagram

---code---
// BROKEN — two systems, no shared transaction. Crash anywhere between
// them and you cannot tell "already done" from "never started".
if (await redis.set(key, 1, "NX")) {   // <-- crash here...
  await db.comments.insert(payload);   // ...and this never runs, forever
}

// CORRECT — the key and the effect commit together, or neither does.
await db.transaction(async (tx) => {
  const claimed = await tx.idempotency_keys
    .insert({ key, request_hash })
    .onConflictDoNothing();
  if (!claimed) return tx.idempotency_keys.get(key).response;
  const comment = await tx.comments.insert(payload);
  await tx.idempotency_keys.setResponse(key, comment);
  return comment;
});
---/code---


Verified — the reference design, and its own escape hatch
The "atomic phases" design is Brandur Leach's
— note the title says "Implementing Stripe-like Idempotency Keys in Postgres."
It is a reference design, not a description of Stripe's internals. Its key rules:
"Atomic phases should be safely committed before initiating any foreign state
mutation." And, importantly: "even foreign calls within your own infrastructure
count! It's tempting to treat emitting records to Kafka as part of atomic operations because
they have such a high success rate that they feel like they are. They're not."
And the exit he offers, which most teams should take: "For endpoints that get away with only
mutating local state in an ACID database, it's possible to get a robust and simple idempotency
implementation by mapping requests to transactions… This approach is far easier
and less complicated than what's described here, and I'd suggest that anyone who can get away with it
take that path."


The three-state machine, and the status codes
----------------------------------------


State	|	Behaviour	|	Status
First time	|	Process normally, persist key + response in the same transaction	|	2xx as usual
Retry (original finished)	|	"respond with the result of the previously completed operation, success or an error"	|	replay the original
Concurrent (original in flight)	|	"respond with a resource conflict error"	|	409
Key reused, different payload	|	Reject — this is a client bug, not a retry	|	422


The most instructive fact in this module
The Idempotency-Key header — implemented by Stripe, Adyen, Square, Shopify and
hundreds of others — is an expired IETF draft that has never been an RFC.
Revision -07, expired 18 April 2026; IESG state: "The IESG has not started processing this draft."
It is also internally stale, still citing RFC 8941 (superseded by 9651) and RFC 7807 (obsoleted by
9457).
This cuts both ways, which is why it's worth teaching. It proves Goedecke's thesis:
familiarity beat standardisation, and Stripe's example became the convention without a committee. It
also shows the limit of "just use the boring standard" — sometimes there isn't one, and the
boring thing is whatever Stripe did.


Where the field disagrees — "optional" is ambiguous
"I definitely disagree about idempotency: it's NOT optional. You don't have
to require idempotency tokens for each request, but there should be an option to specify
them."HN cyberax
Goedecke's phrasing conflates two different things: the client may omit the key (fine, and
Google AIP-155 agrees explicitly — "Request IDs SHOULD be optional") versus the server may
not offer one (not fine). Stripe resolves it: "All POST requests accept idempotency
keys. Don't send idempotency keys in GET and DELETE requests because it has no effect. These
requests are idempotent by definition." The capability is always there; using it is the caller's
choice.
Three things cyberax notes the essay omits entirely, all worth a look:
deadlines (request expiry so the server can stop doing work nobody is waiting for),
backpressure (retries must not become the outage), and static
stability (keep serving reads when writes are failing).


Verified — Stripe's operational details worth copying
Results are saved "regardless of whether it succeeds or fails… Subsequent
requests with the same key return the same result, including 500 errors." Parameters
are compared against the original and mismatches error. Keys are retained 24 hours.
Replays are flagged with Idempotent-Replayed: true; concurrent same-key requests get
409 idempotency_key_in_use.
Two operational traps: "a request that's rate limited with a 429 can produce a
different result with the same idempotency key because rate limiters run before the API's
idempotency layer," and their blunt rule for clients — "Treat requests that
return 500 errors as indeterminate." Also note SDKs auto-generate keys and retry, but
must be configured to; the default retry count is not always what you'd want.
Finally, Google AIP-194: exactly one gRPC code is safe to retry automatically
— UNAVAILABLE. Never auto-retry INVALID_ARGUMENT,
DATA_LOSS, DEADLINE_EXCEEDED, or CANCELLED.


Takeaways
    * PUT and DELETE are idempotent by specification. Use a client-supplied id and PUT before inventing a key mechanism.

    * The idempotency record must commit in the same transaction as the effect. A side cache cannot distinguish "done" from "never started."

    * If you only mutate one ACID database, map the request to a transaction and skip the whole apparatus.

    * Always accept a key; never require one. 409 for concurrent, 422 for key reuse with a different payload.

    * The header is a de facto standard set by Stripe, not an RFC. Sometimes there is no boring standard to reach for.


------------------------------------------
Module 8: Auth, rate limits & blast radius
------------------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * Separate credential lifetime from credential blast radius and argue which matters

    * Design rate limits that let a well-behaved client behave well

    * Justify a killswitch as a product requirement, not an ops afterthought


Goedecke's position
"You should let people use your APIs with a long-lived API key. Yes, API
keys are not as secure as various forms of short-lived credentials, like OAuth (which you should
probably also support). It doesn't matter. Every integration with your API begins life
as a simple script."
His premise is the strongest argument in the essay and the one most engineers resist:
"many of your users will not be professional engineers. They may be salespeople,
product managers, students, hobbyists… When you're an engineer at a tech company building an
API, it's easy to imagine that you're building it for other people like yourself… But
you're not."


The data that should settle it — and doesn't
----------------------------------------


Verified — GitGuardian, State of Secrets Sprawl 2026 (March 2026)
"28.65 million new hardcoded secrets were added to public GitHub commits in 2025
alone, a 34% increase year over year and the largest single-year jump we've recorded."
"In the 2025 report, we found that nearly 70% of credentials confirmed as valid in 2022
were still valid in January 2025… When we retested that same dataset in January 2026,
the validity rate was still above 64%."
Trend: 12.8M (2023) → 23.8M (2024) → 28.65M (2025). Also from that report: AI service
secrets reached 1,275,105 (up 81% YoY), including 113,000 leaked DeepSeek keys; and 24,008 unique
secrets found in MCP config files. Internal repos are ~6× more likely than public ones
to contain hardcoded secrets — keep that for Module 10.
GitHub's own framing: "Long-lived credentials are some of the most common and dangerous
types of secrets to leak, as they often persist unnoticed for months—or years—and give bad
actors extended access." And on time-to-exploit, the canonical honeypot study (Comparitech,
2020) found planted AWS credentials were found and abused in about one minute on
average.


Where the field disagrees — with the obvious conclusion
Read that data and the answer looks like "kill long-lived keys." Now look at what the most
security-mature API companies actually ship in August 2026:

Provider	|	Default credential	|	Expiry
Stripe	|	Long-lived bearer key; restricted keys (rk_) recommended	|	None by default; manual rotation with a 7-day dual-validity window
GitHub	|	Fine-grained PAT, scoped to repos + permissions, org approval on by default	|	"Infinite lifetimes are allowed but may be blocked by a… policy"
Anthropic	|	Workspace-scoped key, expiry presets 3h–30d	|	"Never" is selectable
OpenAI	|	Project-scoped key, service accounts, permission tiers	|	Long-lived by default


Every one of them chose scoping over mandatory expiry. Stripe is explicit: "we
don't recommend using secret keys for new use cases, and for existing integrations, we recommend
migrating secret key usage to RAKs." Not "to short-lived tokens." To restricted keys.
RFC 9700 (BCP 240, January 2025) says the same thing, and it is not the sentence people quote:
"The privileges associated with an access token SHOULD be restricted to the minimum
required… access tokens SHOULD be audience-restricted to a specific
resource server." Its thrust is privilege restriction, audience restriction, and preferring
sender-constrained credentials over plain bearer tokens — not "make it shorter."
So teach claim 6 in its corrected form: support long-lived API keys, and make them
restricted, revocable, attributable, and scanned-for. The lifetime is not the vulnerability.
The unlimited blast radius is. A 90-day key that leaks on day one is live for 90 days; a scoped
read-only key that leaks forever can't move money.
The two genuine cracks in this: Google Cloud now disables service-account key creation by default
for organisations created on or after 3 May 2024, and npm fully revoked classic tokens in December
2025 in favour of 2-hour session tokens. Both are extreme-blast-radius domains — cloud IAM and
the software supply chain — not the salesperson-writing-a-script domain Goedecke is defending.


Someone in the thread went further than he did — is he wrong?
"This is an extremely unpopular opinion, but I would go even further. I think you
should let people use your API with just a username and a password.… For one-off
scripts, APIs that let you do this are a breath of fresh air… They're certainly not picking a
purpose they need this API for from a list of five, not if it doesn't include 'completing a classroom
assignment I don't really care about and want to finish as quickly as possible.'"
HN miki123211
The steelman
and the break. He is right about the population — that student exists and every friction
step loses some of them. He is wrong about the mechanism, and the reason is precise: a password is a
credential the user cannot scope, cannot rotate independently, cannot revoke without locking
themselves out, and which is very likely reused on other services. An API key is already the
minimum-viable improvement on this idea: it is a password with the properties that make it safe to
paste. The correct response to his complaint is not passwords — it is a one-click default
key with sensible read-only scope and a visible revoke button, so the easy path and the safe path
are the same path. That is Goedecke's own argument taken one step further than he took it.


Rate limits: an API is a UI with no hands
----------------------------------------


Goedecke's position — this one drew zero dissent anywhere
"Users who are interacting with your UI are limited by the speed of their hands…
Any operation you expose via an API can be called at the speed of code."
His Zendesk story is the best illustration in the essay: an API that fanned out notifications to
all users of an app was used by a third-party developer to build an in-app chat system, where every
message notified every other user. "For accounts with more than a handful of active users, this
reliably killed the Apps backend server." Nobody anticipated it. Once it was out there, people did
what they wanted with it.
His prescriptions: tighter limits on expensive operations, the ability to disable the API for
specific customers, and X-Limit-Remaining / Retry-After headers —
because "[they] allow you to set stricter rate limits than you would otherwise be able to."


That last clause is the non-obvious one and it's correct: telling clients their budget lets
you give them a smaller budget. A client that can see it has 12 calls left will back off. A
client flying blind will hammer you and then complain.

Verified — two published models worth copying
GitHub GraphQL prices by estimated work: 5,000 points/hour, where points are
computed from connection sizes — "Assume every request will reach the first or
last argument limits… Divide the number by 100." A query touching 100 repos ×
50 issues × 60 labels is 5,101 underlying requests and costs 51 points. Note
that exceeding the primary limit returns HTTP 200 with an error body, and a query
that times out at 10 seconds still deducts points.
Shopify runs a leaky bucket with a refund: "The requested cost is
based on the composition of fields selected. The actual cost is based on the query
results… the bucket is refunded the difference." Their published field costs:
scalar 0, object 1, mutation 10; single-query ceiling 1,000 points regardless of
plan. Their legacy REST limit was 2 requests/second — GraphQL gets far more headroom
because it is priced by work rather than by call.


Takeaways
    * Support long-lived keys — and scope them. The industry's answer to the leak data was restriction, not expiry.

    * Publish remaining-quota and Retry-After headers: transparency buys you the right to be stricter.

    * Price limits by work, not by call count, wherever operations differ in cost by orders of magnitude.

    * A per-customer killswitch is a product requirement. You will need it, and you will need it during an incident.

    * Somebody will build something you never imagined on top of your endpoint. Design as if they already have.


----------------------------------------
Module 9: Deprecation — the long goodbye
----------------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * Emit the two standard deprecation headers with the correct (different) date formats

    * Design a deprecation process with monitoring and consent, not just an announcement

    * Explain what deferring removals costs, using a real example


Where the field disagrees — the biggest gap in the essay
Goedecke has no deprecation vocabulary at all. No sunset dates, no usage
monitoring, no migration windows, no headers. He describes telling users to upgrade — "This takes a
long time: months or even years" — and then stops.
That's a real gap, because "never break userspace" without a removal process isn't a policy, it's
an accumulation strategy. And there are two standards-track-adjacent answers he never mentions, which
are exactly the kind of boring, well-known machinery his own philosophy calls for.


The two headers
---------------


Verified — and easy to state backwards

RFC	|	Header	|	Status	|	Date format
RFC 9745 (March 2025)	|	Deprecation	|	Standards Track	|	Structured-Fields Date: @1688169599
RFC 8594 (May 2019)	|	Sunset	|	Informational	|	HTTP-date: Sat, 31 Dec 2025 23:59:59 GMT


Yes, the two headers use different date formats. RFC 9745 says so in as many words: "Please
note that for historical reasons the Sunset HTTP header field uses a different data format for
date." It also constrains ordering: "The timestamp given in the Sunset HTTP header field
MUST NOT be earlier than the one given in the Deprecation header field."
The trap: the Deprecation syntax changed in March 2025 from
HTTP-date to @epoch. Any tutorial, library, or internal wiki written before then shows
the wrong format.


What a deprecated endpoint should return

---code---
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Deprecation: @1688169599
Sunset: Sun, 30 Jun 2024 23:59:59 UTC
Link: ; rel="deprecation"; type="text/html"
---/code---


Both RFCs are careful to say these are hints, not contracts: "Clients SHOULD treat Sunset
timestamps as hints," and "The act of deprecation does not change any behavior of the
resource." A header is not a migration plan — it is a machine-readable channel for one.


Deprecation as a process, not an announcement
----------------------------------------


Zalando publishes the most complete public deprecation regime, and the striking thing is how much
of it is about consent and observation rather than notification:


Rule	|	Requirement
#185	|	MUST obtain approval of clients before API shut down — "all clients have given their consent on a sunset date."
#186	|	MUST collect external partner consent on the deprecation time span — "before they are allowed to use the API."
#187	|	MUST reflect deprecation in API specifications (deprecated: true)
#188	|	MUST monitor usage of deprecated APIs scheduled for sunset
#189	|	SHOULD add Deprecation and Sunset headers
#191	|	MUST NOT start using deprecated APIs (the entire rule, one sentence)


#186 is the clever one: partners agree to the after-deprecation lifespan as a condition of
access, before they've written a line of code. That converts an eventual argument into a
precondition. #188 is the operationally essential one — if you cannot see who is still calling
the old thing, your sunset date is a guess.

Verified — GitHub's published clock
REST: "When a new REST API version is released, the previous API version will be supported
for at least 24 more months." Calling an unsupported version returns 410 Gone
— a clean, unambiguous failure rather than mysterious behaviour. 2022-11-28 is
supported until 10 March 2028.
GraphQL: "We'll announce upcoming breaking changes at least three months before
making changes to the GraphQL schema… Changes go into effect on the first day of a
quarter." Their published schedule currently runs through 1 January 2027. Predictable dates
are themselves a feature — a partner can plan around a quarter boundary.


What deferral actually costs
----------------------------


The example that should change your mind
GitHub went 3.5 years without a new REST version — strong evidence for "version as a last
resort." Then in March 2026 they shipped 2026-03-10. Look at what was in it:

    * Removing rate from /rate_limit — "deprecated since 2021"

    * Removing has_downloads — "deprecated for 10+ years"

    * Deprecating the beta media type — "officially deprecated in 2014"

    * Removing the singular assignee from Issues and PRs

    * Removing merge_commit_sha from pull request payloads


That version's payload is twelve years of deferred removals, shipped all at once,
to every consumer, with a 24-month clock and a 410 at the end.
The lesson the essay misses: the alternative to versioning is not zero cost. It is
a queue — and a queue that empties on a schedule you no longer control, in a single
disruptive batch, at whatever moment the accumulated weight finally forces it. If you did the
simulator in Module 4, this is precisely the mechanic you were playing against.


The counter-example is real and worth respecting: Twilio has served
api.twilio.com/2010-04-01/ for about sixteen years. Its one predecessor,
2008-04-01, was deprecated in May 2022 and hard-404'd on 15 December 2023 — roughly
twenty months of notice, two versions in eighteen years. It can be done. Note, though, that they
enforce it by blog post: no evidence was found that Twilio emits Sunset or
Deprecation headers at all.

Takeaways
    * Emit Deprecation (RFC 9745, Standards Track, @epoch) and Sunset (RFC 8594, Informational, HTTP-date). Different formats, on purpose.

    * Deprecation is a process: specification flag, usage monitoring, client consent, published date, hard failure.

    * 410 Gone beats undefined behaviour. Tell clients the thing is gone, not that something odd happened.

    * Deferring a removal doesn't cancel it. GitHub's 2026 version carried a deprecation from 2014.

    * You cannot sunset what you cannot measure. Instrument the old path before you announce anything.


--------------------------------------------
Module 10: GraphQL, DX & what really decides
--------------------------------------------


Learning objectives
    * State the GraphQL tradeoff honestly in both directions

    * Decide what actually changes for internal APIs, and what doesn't

    * Assemble the developer-experience argument that connects every previous module


Optional fields first
---------------------


Before GraphQL, Goedecke offers the cheap version of the same idea, and it's good advice:
"If parts of your API response are expensive to serve, make them optional.…
you could have an includes array parameter with all your optional fields."

The 80% of GraphQL you can have for nothing

---code---
GET /users/42
GET /users/42?include=subscription,posts
// Default response stays small and fast. Expensive joins are opt-in.
// Still one cacheable URL per resource. Still readable in a browser bar.
---/code---


Goedecke's position
"I don't like GraphQL very much, for three reasons. First, it's completely
impenetrable to non-engineers (and to many engineers)… Second, I don't like giving users the
freedom to craft arbitrary queries. It makes caching more complicated and increases the number of edge
cases you have to think about. Third, in my experience the backend implementation is so much
more fiddly than your standard REST API."
To his credit he flags his own uncertainty: "I don't feel that strongly… I've spent
maybe six months working with it in various contexts and am far from an expert."


Where the field disagrees — two of the three objections have published answers
Caching. graphql.org concedes the premise — "In GraphQL, there's no URL-like
primitive that provides this globally unique identifier for a given object" — and then answers
it three ways: automatic persisted queries with GET, which lets a CDN cache
GraphQL responses; trusted documents, an allowlist where the client sends a document ID
instead of a query; and normalized client caches like Apollo's InMemoryCache,
which stores "a flat lookup table of objects that can reference each other." That last one is the real
steelman: GraphQL trades HTTP-level caching for object-level caching, which is strictly
finer-grained.
Arbitrary queries and rate limiting. Answered by the cost models in Module 8 —
GitHub's points, Shopify's leaky bucket with refunds, Apollo's demand control with
max_depth / max_aliases limits. Arguably these are more honest than
REST's per-endpoint limits, because they price the work actually done. Trusted documents eliminate the
arbitrary-query problem entirely.
The market moved the other way, hard. Shopify: "The REST Admin API is a legacy API
as of October 1, 2024. Starting April 1, 2025, all new public apps must be built exclusively
with the GraphQL Admin API." Shopify has one of the largest populations of non-expert
third-party developers in software, and they made GraphQL mandatory. That is directly fatal
to "impenetrable to non-engineers" as a market claim.


The steelman he never engages — and it's his own thesis
From the original 2015 GraphQL announcement, under the heading "Version free":
"When you're adding new product features, additional fields can be added to the server,
leaving existing clients unaffected… We still support three years of
released Facebook applications on the same version of our GraphQL API."
Read that against Modules 3 and 4. Additive-only schema evolution as an alternative to versioning
is exactly "we do not break userspace," achieved structurally rather than by discipline.
GraphQL is arguably the most successful implementation of Goedecke's own central claim ever shipped
— and he rejects it. That tension is unresolved in the essay, and it is the single best question
to bring to an API design review.


Verified — the honest state of play, August 2026
No named company has publicly reverted from GraphQL to REST. This was searched
specifically; the "GraphQL retreat" narrative rests on individual engineers' blog posts, not company
postmortems. Meta still runs it (Relay released May 2026); Netflix's Studio Edge has 150 subgraphs and
2,800 queries and mutations powering 50–60 internal apps.
But GraphQL is not winning either. Postman's 2025 State of the API report: REST
93%, webhooks 50%, WebSockets 35%, GraphQL 33%, SOAP 25%, gRPC 14%. It settled at
about a third, and REST stayed near-universal.
The market-size signal: Stellate, the dedicated GraphQL CDN company, had
"near-zero churn," served "over 100 billion GraphQL requests," and still sold for parts in September
2024 — "our growth stalled & the market didn't expand fast enough." The Guild took the
product; Shopify hired the team. (Note: Shopify did not acquire Stellate, despite what you'll
read.)


The objection that survives
The best critical essay is Matt Bessey's, and its strongest argument is one Goedecke didn't make:
"if you expose a fully self documenting query API to all clients, you better be
damn sure that every field is authorised against the current user appropriately to the context in
which that field is being fetched… One wonders how much GraphQL holds responsibility
for Broken Access Control climbing to the OWASP Top 10's #1 spot."
And on the shape of the risk: "since it is a query language, this can become a problem with
no backend changes when a client modifies a query." That is a genuinely different security
posture from REST, where the set of things a client can ask for is fixed by the endpoints you shipped.
Goedecke's own employer supplies mixed evidence too: GitHub built one of the most prominent public
GraphQL APIs, and in November 2025 retired its GraphQL Explorer, noting "Although its overall
usage was limited…" — while continuing to publish a GraphQL breaking-change
calendar into 2027. Read that as ambivalence, not retreat; GitHub has made no statement putting
GraphQL in maintenance.


Internal APIs: less different than he says
----------------------------------------


Goedecke's position
"It's also possible to safely make breaking changes [to internal APIs], because (a) you
often have an order of magnitude fewer users, and (b) you have the ability to go in and ship new code
for all of those users."


Verified — endorsed by the strictest compatibility document in the industry
Google AIP-180, which otherwise forbids nearly everything, carves out exactly his case: "This
guidance assumes that APIs are intended to be called from a range of consumers… with no control
over how and when consumers update. Any API which has a more limited scope (for example, an
API which is only called by client code written by the same team as the API producer, or deployed in a
way which can enforce updates) should carefully consider its own compatibility requirements."


Where the field disagrees — the cleanest single objection in the thread
"I think the only thing here that I don't agree with is that internal users are just users.
Yes, they may be more technical — or likely other programmers, but they're busy
too. Often they're building their own thing and don't have the time or ability to deal with
your API churning. If at all possible, take your time and dog-food your API before opening it
up to others. Once it's opened, you're stuck."HN runroader
The condition that makes his claim true is narrower than "internal": it is you can atomically
deploy every consumer. The moment there is a mobile client with users on old versions, a
partner's staging environment, a data pipeline someone forgot about, or a team on a different release
train, the internal API is a public API wearing a badge. And recall from Module 8: internal repos are
about 6× more likely than public ones to contain hardcoded secrets. Internal
does not mean safer — it means less observed.


The synthesis: developer experience is the through-line
----------------------------------------


Everything in this course is one argument in different clothes. The cost of your API is
paid by people who are not thinking about your API.


Module	|	The decision	|	Who pays if you get it wrong
1 — Boring	|	Familiarity over cleverness	|	Every reader of your docs, forever
2 — Resources	|	Domain nouns, not schema nouns	|	Everyone, permanently — this is the unrecoverable one
3 — Compatibility	|	Declare what's stable	|	Whoever shipped against the part you didn't declare
4 — Versioning	|	Break now, or queue it	|	Your successor, all at once, in twelve years
5 — Errors	|	Machine-readable codes	|	The on-call engineer parsing your prose at 3am
6 — Pagination	|	Cursors, day one	|	Your largest customer, at exactly the wrong moment
7 — Idempotency	|	Same transaction as the effect	|	The person charged twice
8 — Auth & limits	|	Scope, don't expire; publish quota	|	Everyone, when one integration takes you down
9 — Deprecation	|	Measure, consent, announce, 410	|	The integration nobody knew existed
10 — Shape	|	REST vs GraphQL vs both	|	Whoever has to authorise every field


Where this course deliberately departs from its source
Five places, stated plainly so you can disagree with us:

  11. "Never version" understates the cost of not versioning. Deferral is a queue with a
due date you don't control. GitHub's 2026 release is the receipt.

  12. "Bad products make bad APIs" is a gravitational pull, not a law. The API layer is
a translation. Treating it as a passthrough is how you get the linked list on the wire.

  13. "Always cursor" is too strong, and cursors have a worse failure mode than offset
— silent row skips on sort-key mutation — which the essay doesn't mention and neither do
most of its critics.

  14. "Long-lived keys are fine" is right for the wrong reason. The industry's answer to
28 million leaked secrets a year was scoping, not expiry. Say restricted, and the advice
survives the data.

  15. The silences matter as much as the claims. No error format, no deprecation
vocabulary, no spec-first — three boring, well-documented answers that his own "boring beats
clever" philosophy actively demands.


None of these make the essay wrong. It is the best short piece on the subject, and everything in
this course is downstream of it. But an essay is one practitioner's cost model, tested against one
career. Your costs are different, and the point of learning the tradeoff space is to be able to tell
when.


Takeaways
    * Optional include parameters get you most of GraphQL's benefit for none of its cost. Start there.

    * The caching and rate-limiting objections to GraphQL have published answers. The authorization objection does not.

    * GraphQL's "version free" additive evolution is Goedecke's own thesis, implemented in the technology he rejects.

    * "Internal" means "I can deploy every consumer atomically." If you can't, it's public.

    * The through-line: your API's cost is paid by people who aren't thinking about your API. Design for their attention, not yours.


Sourcing note
Every quotation in this course is from a primary source that was fetched and checked in
August 2026. Reddit vote counts come from a Redlib mirror because reddit.com blocks
automated access; Hacker News shows no per-comment scores, so no HN quote carries a vote count.
Several widely-circulated claims about API design were checked and excluded as unverifiable
or fabricated — including a widely-circulated but untraceable GitHub engineering statement about hypermedia's
effect on server load, and a set of company names said to have migrated from GraphQL back to REST.
Two things to re-check before you rely on them: Stripe's current version was
2026-07-29.dahlia at time of writing and the next major train was unannounced; and the
Idempotency-Key draft was expired, which could change.



    The source essay
    HN discussion
    Zalando guidelines
    Google AIPs
    RFC 9457

  Built as an interactive course. Opinions attributed to Sean Goedecke are
  his; dissent is sourced and linked. Verify anything time-sensitive before you cite it.
