SKILLS WALLET ARCHITECTURE — VERIFIABLE CREDENTIALS AND WHAT COURSERA SHOULD BUILD
==================================================================================

    Architecture Course · August 2026

=========================================================================================
SKILLS WALLET ARCHITECTUREVERIFIABLE CREDENTIALS, AND WHAT COURSERA SHOULD ACTUALLY BUILD
=========================================================================================


    The certificate is a PDF. The verification is a support ticket. The learner owns nothing. Twelve modules on the standards stack that fixes this — W3C VC 2.0, Open Badges 3.0, CLR 2.0, DIDs — the wallet and issuer architecture underneath it, and a phased roadmap with honest cost estimates and kill criteria.
    12 Modules·~2 hrs·Quizzes & Flashcards·Built for Mustafa Furniturewala, VP Engineering, Coursera





    0 / 12 complete



    Standards status check — what is actually final, as of August 2026
    This field has a habit of being discussed in the future tense. Most of it is past tense now. Be precise in internal conversations:

        * W3C Verifiable Credentials 2.0 — a W3C Recommendation since 15 May 2025, along with six sibling specs (JOSE/COSE securing, Data Integrity cryptosuites, Controlled Identifiers, Bitstring Status List). Not a draft. Done.

        * Open Badges 3.0 and CLR 2.0 — 1EdTech final specs, built on VCs, with a live certification program. Credly by Pearson certified for OB 3.0 on 27 January 2026.

        * OpenID4VCI 1.0 (issuance) final September 2025; OpenID4VP 1.0 (presentation) final 10 July 2025; SD-JWT published as RFC 9901 in November 2025.

        * EU mandate: all 27 member states must offer a compliant EUDI Wallet by December 2026. Readiness varies, but the deadline is law.

        * Still genuinely unsettled: trust registries (who decides an issuer is legitimate), wallet-to-wallet portability, and the UX of key recovery. These are where the real engineering risk lives.


    The honest summary: the specs stopped being the bottleneck around mid-2025. What is missing is issuers at scale and verifiers who care. Both of those are business problems wearing a technical costume.



    1The Credentialing Problem
    2The Standards Stack
    3The Trust Triangle
    4Wallet Architecture
    5The Issuer Side
    6The Verifier Side
    7The Cloudflare Wallets Intersection
    8The Ecosystem
    9Competitive Analysis
    10Implementation Roadmap
    11Technical Deep Dive
    12Privacy & Compliance




-----------------------------------
Module 1: The Credentialing Problem
-----------------------------------




A Coursera certificate today is a PDF with a URL on it. The URL is the entire security model. Everything in this course follows from taking that sentence seriously.


What a certificate actually is right now
----------------------------------------


Consider the artifact a learner receives on completion. It is a rendered document containing a name, a course title, a date, a signature image, and a verification link back to coursera.org. It looks official. It is designed to look official. And structurally it is a claim about a claim: the PDF asserts that somewhere on a server there is a record, and invites you to go check.

That design has three properties, and all three are problems.



    Property 1
    Unverifiable offline
    The document itself carries no proof. Open it in a text editor and there is nothing to check. Verification requires a live round trip to the issuer — and a human deciding to make it. Most never do.


    Property 2
    Siloed
    A learner with credentials from Coursera, a bootcamp, an employer LMS, and a state licensing board holds four artifacts in four formats with four verification portals. There is no composite view of that person's skills anywhere.


    Property 3
    Institution-controlled
    The record of the achievement lives in the issuer's database. If the issuer changes its URL scheme, deprecates a product, gets acquired, or shuts down, the credential silently becomes unverifiable. The learner has no copy that stands on its own.



The one-sentence framing
Today's credential is a pointer to a database row the issuer controls. A verifiable credential is a signed statement the learner controls. Every architectural decision downstream — wallets, DIDs, status lists, selective disclosure — is a consequence of moving the authoritative artifact from the issuer's server into the learner's hands.


The cost of the status quo, measured honestly
----------------------------------------


It is tempting to describe the current state as broken. It is more accurate to say it is expensive and slow in ways that are invisible because they are distributed across parties who each absorb a small piece.


  * The employer pays in verification latency. A background-check vendor contacting a registrar to confirm a degree is a multi-day operation with a per-check fee. That cost is only tolerable because it happens once per hire, at the end of the funnel, for a small subset of claims.

  * The learner pays in unrecognized skill. A candidate who has completed nine specializations cannot present that as a single verifiable fact. They retype it into a resume, where it becomes indistinguishable from an assertion.

  * The issuer pays in support load and in the strategic cost of being a dead end. Every verification request that lands as a support ticket is an operational expense on a credential you already gave away for free.


The critical asymmetry: verification cost scales with the number of claims, but the current design assumes verification is rare. The moment skills-based hiring makes verification routine — per skill, not per degree — the model collapses under its own arithmetic. That moment has arrived.


The skills-based hiring shift, with real numbers
----------------------------------------


Coursera runs its own primary research here, which is convenient because it means the strongest available data on this question is data you can cite in your own planning documents without buying a report.


Coursera Micro-Credentials Impact Report 2026 — the numbers that matter
Surveying over 3,500 learners, employers, and higher-education leaders across the US, UK, India, Saudi Arabia, Mexico, Indonesia, and the Philippines:

  * 94% of employers are willing to offer higher starting salaries to graduates holding micro-credentials.

  * 92% say entry-level hires with micro-credentials perform better in their first year.

  * 86% rely on skills-based hiring for entry-level roles; 98% globally use skills-based hiring in some form.

  * 96% hired at least three micro-credential holders in the past year; 62% reported a notable productivity increase.


A number to get right before you put it in a deck
The widely repeated framing "70% of employers use skills-based hiring in 2026" is conservative to the point of being wrong relative to Coursera's own survey, which puts it at 86% for entry-level roles and 98% in some form. The gap is a definitional one — "uses skills-based hiring at all" versus "has replaced degree requirements" are very different questions, and the low numbers usually measure the latter.
Practical guidance: cite 86% for entry-level roles with the Coursera report attached. It is defensible, it is yours, and it is the number a skeptical executive can trace to a methodology.


Note carefully what the 94% figure does and does not say. It says employers report a willingness to pay a salary premium for micro-credential holders. It does not say they pay more for cryptographically verified credentials specifically — that study does not exist yet. The bridge between those two statements is an assumption, and it is the central commercial assumption of this entire course. State it as an assumption in any business case, because an executive who catches you conflating the two will discount everything else you said.


Market size: a range, not a number
----------------------------------


The commonly quoted figure for this space is $1.13B growing at 21.7% CAGR. Treat it as one data point among many rather than a fact, because published estimates diverge wildly depending on what the analyst decided to count.


Source / scope	|	Size	|	CAGR
Commonly cited "digital credentials" figure	|	$1.13B	|	21.7%
Digital credential management software (Business Research Co.)	|	$2.58B (2025) → $2.91B (2026)	|	12.7%
Digital credential management software (Market Research Future)	|	$3.14B (2025) → $11.77B (2034)	|	15.2%
Digital credential management (Verified Market Reports)	|	$1.25B (2024) → $3.85B (2033)	|	14.2%
Digital badges only (narrower scope)	|	~$0.24B–$0.32B (2025)	|	17–19%


Why the spread is 10x, and why you should say so out loud
The scope definition is doing all the work. "Digital badges" counts badge-issuing SaaS. "Digital credential management software" counts credential platforms including HR-side verification. Neither counts the value of the hiring decisions the credentials inform, which is where the actual economics live.
My read: the TAM question is the wrong question for this initiative. Coursera is not entering the credential-software market — it already issues millions of credentials. The relevant question is whether verifiable issuance increases enrollment, completion, enterprise renewal, and pricing power on credentials it already sells. That is a defensible attribution study, not a TAM slide.


The scale of the credential landscape
-------------------------------------


Credential Engine's Counting Credentials 2025 report (December 2025) is the best census available:


  1,850,034Unique credentials in the US
  134,000+Distinct credential providers
  1.02MBadges — the largest category
  $2.34TAnnual US investment in education & workforce


Up from 1.08 million credentials in 2022. Certificates account for 486,352 and degrees for 264,099 — meaning badges alone now outnumber degrees roughly four to one.

Sit with that for a moment, because it reframes the problem. The scarce resource is no longer credentials. It is discrimination between them. When a hiring manager sees 1.85 million possible credentials, the signal value of any individual one approaches zero unless something distinguishes a rigorously assessed credential from a completion certificate. That "something" is the real product.


Bring it home — the strategic reframe for Coursera
Coursera's advantage in a world of 1.85 million credentials is not that it issues a lot of them. Several platforms issue a lot of them. The advantage is that behind a meaningful subset of Coursera credentials sits graded assessment, proctored exams, and university or industry partner governance — and none of that provenance survives the trip into a PDF.
A verifiable credential can carry it. That is the actual thesis of this course: the wallet is not the product; the machine-readable assessment provenance is the product, and the wallet is how it travels. Module 5 makes this concrete with a schema, and Module 6 makes it commercial.


Isn't the real blocker just that employers don't check credentials at all?
Partly, and it is the strongest objection to this whole program. Today many employers do not verify because verification is expensive and the base rate of fraud is low enough to absorb. If verification stays optional, making it cryptographically possible changes nothing.
Two things break that equilibrium. First, cost: when verification is a free function call rather than a phone call, the calculus flips from "is it worth checking?" to "why wouldn't we?" Second, and more decisively, AI-driven screening. A human recruiter skimming 200 resumes cannot verify each claim. An agent processing 20,000 applications can verify every claim on every application, and will, because the marginal cost is a network round trip. The demand side for verification is being created by automation, not by policy.
This is why Module 7 matters more than it looks: the verification consumer of 2028 is probably not a person.


Q: What is the structural difference between a traditional certificate and a verifiable credential?  * Verifiable credentials are stored in a blockchain rather than a database
  * A traditional certificate is a pointer to an issuer-controlled database row; a verifiable credential is a self-contained signed statement the learner holds (correct)
  * Verifiable credentials cannot be forged, while PDFs can
  * Verifiable credentials are machine-readable and PDFs are not
Explanation: The location of authority is the whole point. A PDF's verification link means the issuer's server is the source of truth, so the credential dies if the issuer changes URLs or disappears. A VC carries its own cryptographic proof, so it verifies against a public key without the issuer being in the loop. Machine-readability and forgery resistance are consequences, not the definition — and blockchain is not required at all.

Q: Credential Engine counted 1.85 million unique US credentials in 2025, with badges (1.02M) outnumbering degrees (264K) roughly four to one. What does this most directly imply for credential strategy?  * Issuing more credentials is the fastest path to market share
  * The scarce resource is no longer credentials but the ability to discriminate between them, making assessment provenance the differentiator (correct)
  * Badges will replace degrees within a decade
  * The market is saturated and new issuers cannot compete
Explanation: When 1.85 million credentials exist, any individual credential's signal value collapses unless something distinguishes rigor. That makes machine-readable assessment provenance — proctored versus graded versus completion-only — the actual product, which is precisely what a PDF cannot carry and a VC can.

Q: Why should you be careful citing Coursera's '94% of employers would pay more' figure in a verifiable-credentials business case?  * The sample size was too small to be meaningful
  * It measures willingness to pay more for micro-credential holders, not for cryptographically verified credentials — bridging those two is an assumption (correct)
  * The survey only covered the United States
  * The figure is from 2024 and is now outdated
Explanation: The survey (3,500+ respondents across seven countries) is solid, but it establishes a premium for micro-credentials as a category. No published study establishes a premium for verified-versus-unverified. Treating the bridge as proven is the fastest way to lose credibility with a skeptical executive — state it as the central commercial assumption instead.

  * The three failures of the PDF certificate — (1) Unverifiable offline — the document carries no proof, only a link. (2) Siloed — credentials from four issuers means four formats and four portals, with no composite view. (3) Institution-controlled — the authoritative record lives in the issuer's database, so URL changes, deprecation, or shutdown silently kill it.
  * The one-sentence framing of the whole shift — A traditional credential is a pointer to a database row the issuer controls. A verifiable credential is a signed statement the learner controls. Wallets, DIDs, status lists, and selective disclosure are all consequences of that one move.
  * Coursera Micro-Credentials Impact Report 2026 — the four numbers — 94% of employers would offer higher starting salaries to micro-credential holders. 92% say those hires perform better in year one. 86% use skills-based hiring for entry-level roles (98% globally in some form). 3,500+ respondents across seven countries.
  * Counting Credentials 2025 (Credential Engine) — 1,850,034 unique US credentials from 134,000+ providers — up from 1.08M in 2022. Badges 1.02M, certificates 486,352, degrees 264,099. $2.34T invested annually in US education and workforce development.
  * Why market-size figures range 10x — Scope definition does all the work: 'digital badges' (~$0.25B) versus 'digital credential management software' ($2.6–3.1B) versus the commonly cited $1.13B/21.7% figure. None counts the value of the hiring decisions involved. For Coursera the TAM question is the wrong question — the right one is attribution to enrollment, completion, and renewal.
  * What actually breaks the 'nobody verifies anyway' objection — Cost and automation. When verification is a free function call rather than a phone call, the calculus flips. More decisively, an AI screening agent processing 20,000 applications verifies every claim because the marginal cost is a round trip. The verification consumer of 2028 is probably not a person.






-----------------------------
Module 2: The Standards Stack
-----------------------------




Six specifications, each solving exactly one problem, stacked so that a change at one layer does not force a change at the others. If you learn only one thing from this module, learn which layer owns which decision.


The stack, bottom to top
------------------------



    L0

      Identifiers — Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs)
      Answers: how do I name a party without a central registry issuing the name? A DID resolves to a DID document containing public keys. W3C DID Core 1.0 (REC, July 2022)



    L1

      Container — Verifiable Credentials Data Model 2.0
      Answers: what is the generic shape of a signed claim, and how is it secured against tampering? Issuer, subject, validity window, status, proof. Domain-agnostic — it does not know what a course is. W3C REC, 15 May 2025



    L2

      Semantics — Open Badges 3.0
      Answers: what does an achievement look like inside that container? Defines Achievement, AchievementSubject, criteria, evidence, alignment to skill frameworks. An OB 3.0 credential is a W3C VC with an extra context. 1EdTech, final



    L3

      Aggregation — Comprehensive Learner Record 2.0
      Answers: how do I bundle many achievements into one signed record with relationships between them? A CLR is itself a VC that wraps an array of VCs — an outer onion layer that is also signed. 1EdTech, final, developed alongside OB 3.0



    L4

      Transport — OpenID4VCI / OpenID4VP
      Answers: how does a credential actually get into a wallet, and how is it presented? The layer most architecture diagrams forget, and the one that determines whether your credential works in anyone else's wallet. OID4VCI 1.0 final Sept 2025; OID4VP 1.0 final 10 July 2025



    L5

      Lifecycle — Bitstring Status List 1.0
      Answers: how do I revoke or suspend a credential I already handed out? A compressed bitstring published at a URL; each credential holds an index into it. W3C REC, part of the VC 2.0 family




The layering rule that makes this tractable
Each layer is replaceable without touching the ones above it. You can change DID method (L0) without changing your credential schema (L2). You can add CLR bundling (L3) without reissuing anything. You can swap transport (L4) without re-signing.
The one exception, and it bites people: the securing mechanism at L1 constrains selective disclosure at every layer above. If you sign with plain Ed25519 over the whole document, you have foreclosed field-level disclosure forever for those credentials. Module 11 covers the escape routes; the point here is that it is an L1 decision with L3 consequences, and it is close to irreversible at scale.


W3C Verifiable Credentials 2.0 — the container
----------------------------------------


Became a W3C Recommendation on 15 May 2025, alongside six sibling specifications covering JOSE/COSE securing, Data Integrity cryptosuites, Controlled Identifiers, and Bitstring Status Lists. This is a finished, stable, royalty-free web standard, not an emerging technology.

The data model is deliberately thin. A credential is:

Minimal VC 2.0 skeleton

---code---
{
  "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/ns/credentials/v2"],
  "id": "urn:uuid:3f9d2a1c-...",
  "type": ["VerifiableCredential"],
  "issuer": "did:web:coursera.org",
  "validFrom": "2026-08-05T14:22:00Z",
  "credentialSubject": {
    "id": "did:key:z6MkhaXgBZDvotDkL5257faiztiGiC2QtKLGpbnnEGta2doK"
  },
  "credentialStatus": { ... },
  "proof": { ... }
}
---/code---


Five things worth noting, because each is a trap for people carrying v1.1 habits:


  * validFrom / validUntil, not issuanceDate / expirationDate. The v1.1 names are gone in 2.0. Mixing them silently produces credentials that fail strict validation.

  * issuer may be a string or an object. Use the object form when you want to carry a display name and URL, which you do for anything a human will see.

  * credentialSubject.id is optional. A credential with no subject identifier is a bearer credential — anyone holding it can present it. Sometimes correct; usually not what you want for a learner achievement.

  * proof is not the only way to secure a credential. The VC-JOSE-COSE spec lets you wrap the credential in a JWT instead, with no proof member at all. Two legitimate securing mechanisms, and verifiers must handle whichever you chose.

  * The @context is load-bearing. JSON-LD processing means unknown terms are an error, not something to ignore. Every field you add needs a context entry.


Open Badges 3.0 — the achievement semantics
----------------------------------------


1EdTech rebuilt Open Badges on top of W3C VCs for version 3.0, and developed CLR 2.0 alongside it so the two share a data model. The practical consequence: an Open Badges 3.0 assertion is a Verifiable Credential. There is no conversion step. You add a context and a type, and the achievement-specific vocabulary becomes available.

Open Badges 3.0 — the shape that matters

---code---
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/credentials/v2",
    "https://purl.imsglobal.org/spec/ob/v3p0/context-3.0.3.json"
  ],
  "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "OpenBadgeCredential"],
  "issuer": {
    "id": "did:web:coursera.org",
    "type": ["Profile"],
    "name": "Coursera",
    "url": "https://www.coursera.org"
  },
  "validFrom": "2026-08-05T14:22:00Z",
  "credentialSubject": {
    "type": ["AchievementSubject"],
    "id": "did:key:z6MkhaXgBZ...",
    "achievement": {
      "id": "https://coursera.org/achievements/gen-ai-for-everyone",
      "type": ["Achievement"],
      "achievementType": "Certificate",
      "name": "Generative AI for Everyone",
      "description": "...",
      "criteria": { "narrative": "Completed all graded assessments with 80% or higher." },
      "alignment": [ ... ]
    }
  }
}
---/code---


The two fields that carry the strategic weight are criteria and alignment, and both are routinely left empty by lazy issuers.


  * criteria is what a human or agent reads to understand what the learner had to do. "Watched the videos" and "passed a proctored exam at 80%" are the same badge shape with radically different meaning. Fill this in.

  * alignment points the achievement at an external skill framework — O*NET, ESCO, a competency framework, or Credential Engine's CTDL. This is what makes credentials comparable across issuers, which is what makes skills-based search possible at all.


The unglamorous field that decides whether any of this works
alignment is the difference between a portable credential and a portable image. Without it, an employer holding badges from Coursera, Google, and a bootcamp has three incomparable strings. With it, all three point at the same skill concept and become a set operation.
This is also where Coursera has an unusual asset. Coursera already maintains an internal skills taxonomy mapped across its catalog. Emitting that mapping as alignment entries is comparatively cheap engineering with outsized strategic value — it makes Coursera credentials machine-comparable while competitors emit bare strings. If one thing in this course gets funded, make it this.


CLR 2.0 — the bundle
--------------------


A Comprehensive Learner Record allows many Open Badge achievement credentials to be bundled together with defined associations between them — another onion layer wrapping the inner set of credentials, and itself signed.

Two things this buys you that individual badges cannot:


  1. Relationships. "This specialization certificate is composed of these five course certificates" is expressible as structure rather than convention. A verifier can traverse it.

  2. Multi-source aggregation. A CLR can bundle credentials from different issuers into one presentable record — which is what a transcript actually is, and what a resume is pretending to be.


The subtlety worth internalizing: bundling does not re-attest. A CLR containing a third-party credential does not mean the CLR signer vouches for that credential's content. It means "I assembled these." Verifiers must check each inner credential's own proof independently. Getting this wrong is the most common CLR implementation bug — and it is a security bug, not a correctness one.


DIDs — identifiers without a registrar
--------------------------------------


A DID is a URI that resolves to a DID document containing public keys and service endpoints. The critical property: resolution requires no central authority to have issued the identifier.


Method	|	How it resolves	|	Good for	|	Trade-off
did:web	|	HTTPS fetch of /.well-known/did.json at the domain	|	Institutional issuers. Trust inherits from the domain and its TLS certificate.	|	Centralized — if you lose the domain, you lose the identity. For Coursera this is a feature.
did:key	|	Nothing to fetch — the key is encoded in the identifier itself	|	Learners. Zero infrastructure, works offline, generated on-device in milliseconds.	|	No rotation. Key loss is identity loss. Static across verifiers, so it correlates.
did:jwk	|	Same idea as did:key, JWK-encoded	|	JOSE-native stacks	|	Same rotation limitation
did:ion, did:ethr, ledger methods	|	Distributed ledger lookup	|	Censorship resistance	|	Operational complexity, cost, latency, and a governance story you must defend


The recommendation, stated plainly
did:web for Coursera. did:key for learners. No ledger anywhere.
Coursera's trust genuinely does derive from controlling coursera.org — pretending otherwise by putting an identifier on a chain adds operational cost and a governance conversation while removing nothing. And did:web means a verifier's "resolve the issuer" step is an HTTPS GET their existing infrastructure already knows how to do, cache, and monitor.
The one legitimate objection: did:web means a verifier can tell that a credential was issued by Coursera before checking anything else, and that domain control is a single point of failure. Both are true. Both are acceptable for an institutional issuer whose whole value proposition is being a recognized institution.


How the layers actually compose
-------------------------------


  1L0 — IdentifyCoursera publishes did:web:coursera.org. The learner's wallet generates did:key:z6Mk... on device.
  2L2 — DescribeCoursera assembles an OpenBadgeCredential naming the achievement, criteria, and skill alignments.
  3L5 — Allocate statusThe issuer assigns an index in a published bitstring status list so the credential can be revoked later.
  4L1 — SecureThe credential is signed — a Data Integrity proof or a JWT — referencing a key in Coursera's DID document.
  5L4 — DeliverAn OID4VCI credential offer is generated as a link or QR. The wallet redeems it and stores the credential.
  6L3 — AggregateLater, the learner bundles several credentials into a signed CLR for a single application.
  7L4 — PresentAn employer requests specific credentials over OID4VP. The wallet builds a Verifiable Presentation, signed by the learner's key, bound to that verifier and a one-time challenge.


What is genuinely not settled
-----------------------------


Three unsolved problems — know them before someone else names them in your review
1. Trust registries. Verifying a signature proves who issued a credential. It says nothing about whether that issuer should be believed. Anyone can stand up did:web:definitely-a-real-university.example and issue perfect credentials. The ecosystem answer — accreditation-backed issuer registries — exists in fragments (1EdTech certification, Credential Engine, national registries) with no interoperable resolution story. This is the largest open gap in the field.
2. Wallet portability. Credentials are portable in principle. Moving your whole wallet — keys, credentials, history — from one vendor to another is not standardized. A learner who picks the wrong wallet in 2026 may be stuck.
3. Key recovery. A did:key learner who loses their phone loses their identity, and every credential bound to it must be reissued. Every proposed fix (custodial backup, social recovery, seed phrases) trades away either self-sovereignty or usability. Nobody has solved this. Module 4 treats it as the hardest problem in wallet design, because it is.


Why not just sign a JSON blob with our own scheme? We control both ends anyway.
You do not control both ends — that is the entire premise. Controlling both ends is what you have today, and it is what makes a Coursera certificate valueless outside Coursera.
A proprietary signed blob gets you tamper-evidence, which is genuinely the easy 20%. What it does not get you: a verifier who already has a library that parses it, a wallet that will store it, an ATS that can ingest it, a skills framework it aligns to, a revocation mechanism verifiers already poll, or a regulator who recognizes it. In the EU, where all 27 member states must ship EUDI Wallets by December 2026, a proprietary format is simply not admissible into the wallet.
The standards are not there because they are elegant. They are there because the value of a credential is proportional to the number of parties who can check it without a prior agreement with you. A custom format sets that number to one.


Q: What is the relationship between Open Badges 3.0 and W3C Verifiable Credentials?  * They are competing standards that solve the same problem
  * Open Badges 3.0 is a profile of W3C VCs — an OB 3.0 assertion is a VC with an additional JSON-LD context and type (correct)
  * Open Badges 3.0 wraps VCs in a proprietary 1EdTech envelope
  * W3C VCs were derived from Open Badges 3.0
Explanation: 1EdTech rebuilt Open Badges on the W3C VC data model for 3.0, and developed CLR 2.0 alongside it so both share that model. There is no conversion step — you add the OB context and the OpenBadgeCredential type, and achievement-specific vocabulary becomes available inside a standard VC.

Q: Which DID method combination is recommended for a platform like Coursera, and why?  * did:ion for both issuer and learner, for censorship resistance
  * did:web for Coursera and did:key for learners — trust inherits from the domain, and learners need zero infrastructure (correct)
  * did:key for both, since it requires no hosting
  * did:web for both, so every party is resolvable over HTTPS
Explanation: Coursera's trust genuinely derives from controlling coursera.org, so did:web (an HTTPS fetch of /.well-known/did.json) matches reality and lets verifiers reuse infrastructure they already have. Learners need an identifier generated on-device in milliseconds with nothing to host, which is did:key. A ledger adds cost and governance while removing nothing.

Q: A CLR 2.0 bundles credentials from three different issuers. What must a verifier do?  * Verify only the CLR's outer signature, since the bundler vouches for its contents
  * Verify the CLR's signature and independently verify each inner credential's own proof (correct)
  * Reject the CLR, since multi-issuer bundles are not permitted
  * Verify the inner credentials only if the outer signature fails
Explanation: Bundling is assembly, not attestation. The CLR signature proves who assembled the set; it says nothing about the validity of credentials issued by other parties. Trusting the outer signature alone is the most common CLR implementation bug, and it is a security bug — it would let any bundler launder arbitrary claims.

Q: Which layer decision most constrains your options at every layer above it?  * The DID method chosen for learners
  * The securing mechanism at the VC layer, because it determines whether field-level selective disclosure is possible (correct)
  * The transport protocol used for issuance
  * The status list size
Explanation: Signing with a plain Ed25519 signature over the whole document forecloses field-level disclosure for those credentials permanently — you cannot retrofit it without reissuing. DID method, transport, and status list size are all swappable later without re-signing. This is the one place where layer independence breaks down.

  * The six-layer stack, bottom to top — L0 DIDs (identifiers) → L1 VC Data Model 2.0 (container + securing) → L2 Open Badges 3.0 (achievement semantics) → L3 CLR 2.0 (bundling) → L4 OpenID4VCI/VP (transport) → L5 Bitstring Status List (revocation).
  * VC 2.0 traps for people with v1.1 habits — validFrom/validUntil replaced issuanceDate/expirationDate. issuer can be a string or object. credentialSubject.id is optional — omitting it creates a bearer credential. proof isn't the only securing mechanism (VC-JOSE-COSE uses a JWT wrapper). @context is load-bearing: unknown terms are errors.
  * The two OB 3.0 fields that carry strategic weight — criteria (what the learner actually had to do — 'watched videos' vs 'passed a proctored exam at 80%' are the same shape, different meaning) and alignment (pointers to external skill frameworks like O*NET, ESCO, or CTDL, which is what makes credentials comparable across issuers).
  * Why alignment is the highest-leverage cheap win for Coursera — Without alignment, badges from three issuers are three incomparable strings. With it, they point at the same skill concept and become a set operation. Coursera already maintains an internal skills taxonomy across its catalog — emitting it as alignment entries is cheap engineering that makes its credentials machine-comparable while competitors emit bare strings.
  * CLR bundling does not re-attest — A CLR containing third-party credentials means 'I assembled these,' not 'I vouch for these.' Verifiers must independently check every inner credential's own proof. Trusting only the outer signature is the most common CLR bug — and it's a security bug, since it would let any bundler launder arbitrary claims.
  * did:web vs did:key — did:web resolves by HTTPS fetch of /.well-known/did.json — trust inherits from the domain, supports rotation, right for institutions. did:key encodes the key in the identifier itself — zero infrastructure, works offline, but no rotation and it correlates across verifiers. Right for learners.
  * The three genuinely unsolved problems — (1) Trust registries — signature verification proves who issued, not whether they should be believed; anyone can stand up a convincing did:web. (2) Wallet portability — credentials are portable, whole wallets are not. (3) Key recovery — every fix trades away self-sovereignty or usability.






----------------------------
Module 3: The Trust Triangle
----------------------------




Issuer, Holder, Verifier. Three roles, and one property that makes the whole thing worth building: the verifier never has to talk to the issuer.


The three roles — and the fourth corner everyone forgets
----------------------------------------



    Issuer
    Coursera
    Asserts a claim and signs it with a private key. Publishes the corresponding public key in a DID document. Maintains a revocation status list. Then steps out of the transaction permanently.


    Holder
    The learner
    Stores credentials in a wallet. Decides what to share, with whom, and how much. Signs presentations with their own key to prove they are the subject and not merely a possessor.


    Verifier
    The employer
    Requests credentials, checks the cryptographic proof against the issuer's published key, checks revocation status, and decides whether to trust the issuer at all.


    The fourth corner
    Verifiable Data Registry
    Wherever public keys, schemas, and status lists are published. For did:web this is simply HTTPS + DNS + the CA system — no ledger required. Most diagrams draw a blockchain here and confuse everyone.



The property that justifies the entire architecture
The verifier never contacts the issuer about a specific learner. They fetch a public key (cacheable, learner-independent) and a status list (cacheable, covers ~131,000 credentials at once). Neither request reveals which learner is being checked.
Contrast with today: verification means asking Coursera about a named person. That is a privacy leak, a latency cost, an availability dependency, and a business relationship — four problems that vanish simultaneously. Everything else in this course is plumbing in service of this one property.


What actually happens on the wire
---------------------------------


  1Verifier → HolderA presentation request: "I need a credential of type OpenBadgeCredential aligned to skill X." Includes a nonce and the verifier's identity (domain).
  2Holder (wallet)Matches local credentials against the request. Shows the learner exactly what is being asked for and what would be revealed. Learner approves.
  3HolderBuilds a VerifiablePresentation wrapping the selected credentials, and signs it with the learner's private key over the nonce and domain.
  4VerifierChecks the presentation signature → proves the presenter controls the subject DID, and that this presentation was made for this verifier, now.
  5Verifier → RegistryResolves did:web:coursera.org → https://coursera.org/.well-known/did.json. Cached aggressively.
  6VerifierChecks each credential signature against the issuer's public key → proves the content is unmodified and genuinely from Coursera.
  7Verifier → RegistryFetches the status list, checks the credential's bit → not revoked. One fetch covers the whole list.
  8VerifierChecks validFrom/validUntil, schema conformance, and finally the business question: do I trust did:web:coursera.org? That last one is policy, not cryptography.


Step 4 is the one implementations skip
Checking the credential signature but not the presentation signature is a complete authentication bypass. Without step 4, anyone who obtains a copy of a credential can present it as their own — you have verified that Coursera said something true about Alice, and then handed the job to Bob.
The nonce and domain binding matter just as much: without them, a valid presentation captured by one verifier can be replayed to another. If you write a verifier library, these three checks — presentation signature, nonce freshness, domain match — are the ones to put a test around first.


Holder binding: proving you are the subject
----------------------------------------


The mechanism that makes a credential non-transferable is that credentialSubject.id contains the learner's DID, and presenting it requires signing with the corresponding private key. Possession of the document is not enough; you need the key.

This has a consequence people find surprising: a credential is only as non-transferable as the learner's willingness to hand over their key. Nothing stops a learner from giving someone their phone and PIN. Cryptography prevents theft, not collusion. Anyone claiming VCs eliminate credential fraud is overselling — they eliminate forgery and tampering, which is a large and worthwhile subset.


Selective disclosure — three mechanisms, honestly ranked
----------------------------------------


"Prove you have this skill without revealing your grade" is the canonical demo. Here is what actually delivers it, in ascending order of sophistication and descending order of readiness.


Mechanism	|	How it works	|	Unlinkable?	|	Readiness
Atomic credentials	|	Issue many small credentials instead of one big one. Share only the relevant ones.	|	No	|	Ship today — needs no crypto beyond ordinary signatures
SD-JWT (RFC 9901, Nov 2025)	|	Issuer signs salted hashes of each claim; holder reveals only chosen claims plus their salts.	|	No — the signature is a constant across presentations	|	Production — an IETF RFC, used in EUDI
BBS+ / bbs-2023	|	Multi-message signature scheme; holder derives a fresh zero-knowledge proof revealing a chosen subset.	|	Yes — each derived proof is unique	|	Emerging — cryptosuite still maturing, library support thin
ZK predicates ("score > 80" without the score)	|	General-purpose zero-knowledge circuits over credential claims.	|	Yes	|	Research — no interoperable production deployment in education


Where the honest line sits, and where marketing crosses it
"Zero-knowledge proofs let a learner prove they scored above 80% without revealing the score" is the sentence that appears in every deck about this topic. That specific capability — a ZK predicate over a numeric claim — is not something you can ship interoperably in 2026.
What you can ship is selective disclosure of whole fields: reveal the skill, hide the score. Practically, this satisfies nearly every real use case, because employers want to know whether you have the skill far more often than they want a range proof over your grade.
My recommendation: design the schema so atomic disclosure is possible, secure with SD-JWT where field-level hiding is needed, and treat BBS+ as a fast-follow. Do not put ZK predicates on a roadmap you intend to be held to.


The unlinkability question, and why it may matter less than it seems
----------------------------------------


SD-JWT hides fields but not identity across presentations: the issuer's signature is a constant, so two verifiers who compare notes can tell they saw the same credential. BBS+ fixes this by deriving a fresh proof each time.

Whether you should care depends entirely on the credential. For an employment credential the learner is deliberately presenting under their real name to a named employer, correlation is largely moot — they already told you who they are. For an anonymous skills marketplace, or a credential asserting something sensitive (a disability accommodation, a recovery program completion), unlinkability is the whole ballgame.

Practical guidance: segment by sensitivity. Ordinary course completions do not need BBS+. If Coursera ever issues credentials touching protected categories, that class needs a different securing mechanism from day one — and as Module 2 noted, that decision is close to irreversible once issued at scale.


DIDComm — the encrypted channel, and its actual status
----------------------------------------


DIDComm v2 (Decentralized Identity Foundation) defines encrypted, authenticated, transport-agnostic messaging between DIDs. Messages are encrypted to the recipient's DID document keys and can travel over HTTPS, Bluetooth, or a mediator — enabling long-lived agent-to-agent relationships without a shared server.


Where DIDComm stands versus OpenID4VC — say this accurately
DIDComm is elegant and it is not what won for credential issuance and presentation. OpenID4VCI 1.0 (final September 2025) and OpenID4VP 1.0 (final 10 July 2025) are what the EU Digital Identity Wallet ecosystem standardized on, and at W3C TPAC in November 2025 the FedID working group hardcoded a finite protocol list for the browser Digital Credentials API: openid4vp-v1-*, org-iso-mdoc, and openid4vci-v1. DIDComm is not on that list.
The practical read for an architect: build OID4VCI/OID4VP first. That is what wallets, browsers, and the EU stack speak. Treat DIDComm as an option for peer-to-peer flows outside issuance and presentation — not as your primary transport. Choosing DIDComm as the main channel in 2026 means building bridges to reach every wallet that matters.


If the verifier never contacts the issuer, how does revocation work without a phone-home?
It is a phone-home to a list, not to a lookup. Bitstring Status List works by publishing one compressed bitstring covering a large population of credentials — commonly 131,072 or more. Each credential carries an index. The verifier fetches the entire list and reads one bit.
That gives herd privacy: the issuer learns that someone checked list #3, not which of the 131,072 credentials in it. With a CDN in front and no per-request logging, even the timing signal is weak. Compressed, such a list is a few kilobytes.
Two residual leaks worth naming honestly. First, the fetch reveals the verifier's IP and rough timing to whoever serves the list, so serve it from a CDN and do not log. Second, if a status list is small or a credential type is rare, the anonymity set shrinks and the herd stops helping — which is an argument for large, well-mixed lists rather than one list per course.


Q: What is the single property that most justifies the verifiable-credentials architecture?  * Credentials cannot be forged because they are cryptographically signed
  * The verifier never has to contact the issuer about a specific learner, eliminating a privacy leak, a latency cost, an availability dependency, and a business relationship at once (correct)
  * Credentials are stored on a decentralized ledger
  * Learners can revoke access to their credentials at any time
Explanation: Forgery resistance is valuable but is the easy part. The architectural payoff is that verification requires only a cacheable, learner-independent public key fetch and a status list covering ~131,000 credentials — so nobody learns which learner was checked, and the issuer's availability is irrelevant to the transaction.

Q: A verifier checks the credential's signature against Coursera's public key and confirms it is unmodified and unrevoked. What critical check might still be missing?  * Whether the credential's JSON-LD context resolves
  * The presentation signature — proving the presenter actually controls the subject DID rather than merely possessing a copy (correct)
  * Whether the issuer's TLS certificate is valid
  * Whether the achievement has an alignment field
Explanation: Skipping the presentation-signature check is a complete authentication bypass: you would have proven Coursera said something true about Alice, then handed the job to Bob. The nonce and domain binding matter equally — without them a captured presentation replays to a different verifier.

Q: Which selective-disclosure mechanism is production-ready AND provides unlinkability across presentations?  * SD-JWT, standardized as RFC 9901 in November 2025
  * Atomic credentials — issuing many small credentials instead of one
  * BBS+ (bbs-2023) — production-ready and unlinkable
  * None: SD-JWT is production-ready but linkable, and BBS+ is unlinkable but still maturing (correct)
Explanation: SD-JWT ships today and is used in EUDI, but the issuer signature is a constant across presentations, so two verifiers can correlate. BBS+ derives a fresh zero-knowledge proof each time and is genuinely unlinkable, but cryptosuite and library support are still thin. There is currently no option that is both.

Q: Why should DIDComm not be your primary transport for credential issuance in 2026?  * It is insecure for high-value credentials
  * It has been deprecated by the Decentralized Identity Foundation
  * OpenID4VCI/VP won in practice — they are what EUDI standardized on and what the browser Digital Credentials API hardcoded at TPAC November 2025 (correct)
  * It cannot carry W3C Verifiable Credentials
Explanation: DIDComm is technically elegant and still useful for peer-to-peer flows, but the ecosystem consolidated elsewhere. The W3C FedID WG hardcoded openid4vp-v1-*, org-iso-mdoc, and openid4vci-v1 — DIDComm is not on that list. Choosing it as the main channel means building bridges to reach every wallet that matters.

  * The trust triangle, plus the corner people forget — Issuer signs and publishes a public key, then leaves. Holder stores and decides what to share. Verifier checks proof and status. The fourth corner is the Verifiable Data Registry — for did:web that's just HTTPS + DNS + the CA system, not a blockchain.
  * The eight verification steps — (1) Request with nonce + domain. (2) Wallet matches, learner approves. (3) Holder signs a VerifiablePresentation. (4) Check presentation signature. (5) Resolve issuer DID. (6) Check credential signature. (7) Check status list bit. (8) Decide whether you trust the issuer — that last one is policy, not cryptography.
  * The check implementations skip — The presentation signature (step 4). Without it, anyone possessing a copy of a credential can present it as their own — you'd verify Coursera said something true about Alice, then hire Bob. Nonce freshness and domain binding are equally load-bearing against replay.
  * What VCs actually prevent — Forgery and tampering — a large, worthwhile subset. They do NOT prevent collusion: nothing stops a learner from handing over their phone and PIN. Holder binding makes credentials non-transferable only to the extent the holder guards their key.
  * Selective disclosure, ranked by readiness — Atomic credentials (ship today, linkable) → SD-JWT / RFC 9901 (production, used in EUDI, linkable) → BBS+ bbs-2023 (unlinkable, still maturing) → ZK predicates like 'score > 80' (research; no interoperable education deployment). Design for atomic, secure with SD-JWT, treat BBS+ as fast-follow, don't roadmap ZK predicates.
  * When unlinkability actually matters — Rarely for employment credentials — the learner is deliberately presenting under their real name to a named employer, so correlation is moot. It's decisive for anonymous skills marketplaces and credentials touching protected categories. Segment by sensitivity; that securing decision is near-irreversible at scale.
  * Herd privacy in Bitstring Status List — One compressed bitstring covers ~131,072 credentials; each credential holds an index; the verifier fetches the whole list and reads one bit. The issuer learns someone checked list #3, not which credential. Residual leaks: verifier IP/timing (serve from CDN, don't log) and small lists shrinking the anonymity set.






-----------------------------
Module 4: Wallet Architecture
-----------------------------




A wallet is four hard problems in a trench coat: key custody, storage, protocol handling, and recovery. Three of them are solved. The fourth is why wallets are still bad.


Component architecture
----------------------



    Component 1
    Key store
    Generates and holds the learner's private key. Should be hardware-backed — Secure Enclave on iOS, StrongBox / Android Keystore — so the key is non-extractable: the OS signs on the app's behalf and never hands over the bytes.


    Component 2
    Credential store
    Encrypted local database of credentials plus metadata (source, date received, presentation history). Encryption key derived from a user secret and/or held in the key store.


    Component 3
    Protocol handlers
    OID4VCI for receiving, OID4VP for presenting, plus deep-link and QR handling. This is where interoperability lives or dies — and where most of the ongoing maintenance is.


    Component 4
    Presentation engine
    Matches incoming requests against held credentials, computes what would be revealed, renders that to the learner in language they understand, and builds the signed presentation on approval.


    Component 5
    Backup & recovery
    The hard one. Encrypted export, cloud-backed restore, or social recovery — each trading self-sovereignty against the certainty that people lose phones.


    Component 6
    Trust & policy UI
    Shows who is asking, whether the issuer is recognized, and what a "verified" checkmark actually means. Mostly a design problem, and the one that determines whether learners get phished.



Key management: the non-negotiables
-----------------------------------


  * Generate on device, never transmit. A private key that touched a server is a private key the server's operator could have kept. If Coursera generates learner keys, Coursera can impersonate learners — and the entire self-sovereignty claim is theater.

  * Hardware-backed and non-extractable. Use the platform keystore so signing happens inside the secure element. Malware on a rooted device can request signatures; it cannot exfiltrate the key and sign forever elsewhere.

  * Bind unlock to biometrics or device passcode. Signing should require a user-presence gesture, not merely an unlocked app.

  * Consider per-verifier keys. One static did:key presented to every employer is a persistent cross-verifier identifier — effectively a cookie that cannot be cleared. Pairwise DIDs fix it at real cost in complexity and credential reuse, since a credential is bound to one subject DID.


Recovery: the unsolved problem, stated without euphemism
A learner whose device is lost, stolen, or factory-reset has lost their private key. Every credential bound to that did:key is now unpresentable. Not revoked — just orphaned. The options, all bad in different ways:

  * Reissue from the issuer. Works, and is the only path most deployments actually use. But it means the issuer must retain enough to reissue — which quietly reintroduces the issuer-controlled database the architecture was meant to escape. Honest, and fine, as long as nobody pretends otherwise.

  * Encrypted cloud backup. Good UX; makes the cloud provider a custodian of the encrypted blob, and the passphrase becomes the new single point of failure.

  * Seed phrase. Fully self-sovereign; catastrophic usability. A decade of crypto-wallet evidence says ordinary users lose seed phrases at high rates.

  * Social recovery. Elegant on paper; requires the learner to have designated guardians in advance, which almost nobody does.


The pragmatic answer for an education issuer: hardware-backed keys, encrypted optional backup, and a frictionless reissuance path as the real safety net. Design reissuance as a first-class flow rather than a support escalation — because at Coursera's scale it will be the most-used recovery mechanism by an enormous margin.


Storage: on-device versus cloud-backed
--------------------------------------


	|	On-device only	|	Cloud-backed (encrypted)	|	Custodial / web wallet
Key custody	|	Learner, hardware-backed	|	Learner; encrypted backup escrowed	|	Provider holds keys
Device loss	|	Total loss	|	Recoverable	|	Nothing to lose
Multi-device	|	No	|	Yes	|	Yes
Provider can impersonate	|	No	|	No (if E2E)	|	Yes
Onboarding friction	|	App install	|	App install + backup setup	|	A login
Honest label	|	Self-sovereign	|	Self-sovereign with a safety net	|	Not self-sovereign — say so


The uncomfortable recommendation
For a platform with a very large, global, mobile-diverse learner base, a custodial web wallet will out-adopt a self-sovereign mobile wallet by an order of magnitude, because "log in and your credentials are there" beats "install an app, secure a key, save a backup" every time.
The right move is not to pick one. It is to ship the custodial web wallet for reach and support export to any standards-compliant wallet for sovereignty — and to be scrupulously honest in the UI about which mode a learner is in. The failure mode to avoid is marketing a custodial product as self-sovereign. That is the kind of claim that gets quoted back at you in a conference talk.


Import, export, and the multi-issuer reality
----------------------------------------


A wallet that only holds Coursera credentials is a Coursera feature, not a wallet. The import paths that must work:


  3. OID4VCI credential offer — the standard path. Issuer generates an offer (deep link or QR), wallet redeems it for the credential. Works with any conforming issuer.

  4. File import — a .json or .jwt credential dropped in from email or downloads. Unglamorous, and how a great deal of real-world movement happens.

  5. Legacy Open Badges 2.0 — hosted or baked-in-PNG badges. Millions exist. A wallet that cannot ingest them starts empty, and an empty wallet gets deleted.


Export must be equally serious: standards-compliant credential files, an encrypted full-wallet archive, and a plain human-readable summary. If export is worse than import, you have built a roach motel and the ecosystem will notice.


Reference implementations worth studying
----------------------------------------


MIT's Learner Credential Wallet — the obvious starting point
Developed by the Digital Credentials Consortium (a global network of universities including MIT), originally with US Department of Education grant funding from 2020. Cross-platform iOS and Android, supports W3C VCs and Open Badges 3.0.
Stewardship has moved to the OpenWallet Foundation (a Linux Foundation initiative); the code lives at openwallet-foundation-labs/learner-credential-wallet on GitHub. The DCC itself now operates as the Digital Credentials Commons.
Why it matters for a build-versus-fork decision: it is education-native (built around learner credentials rather than government ID), open source, already shipped to both app stores, and governed by a neutral foundation rather than a vendor. That last point is what makes forking it defensible in a partner conversation — you are not adopting a competitor's stack.


ASU Pocket — the real-world deployment to learn from
Arizona State University's digital wallet for storing achievements across work and learning — badges, experiences, academic and employment records — as Verifiable Credentials, stored encrypted on device. It went to open beta on iOS and Android in November 2023, sits alongside ASU's Trusted Learner Network, and spawned a sibling app, My Skills Pocket, aimed at career mobility for retail workers.
The lesson is less technical than organizational. ASU did not ship a wallet and wait. It shipped a wallet plus an issuer network plus a target population with a concrete career-mobility use case. The wallet was the least interesting part. Any Coursera plan that funds the app and underfunds the issuance pipeline and the demand side will reproduce the most common failure in this field: a well-built wallet with nothing worth putting in it.


Revocation from the wallet's side
---------------------------------


Wallets do not enforce revocation — verifiers do. But a good wallet surfaces it: periodically re-check status lists for held credentials and tell the learner when something has been revoked or expired, rather than letting them discover it in an interview.

This creates a genuine privacy tension. Background status polling means the wallet phones the issuer's CDN on a schedule, producing a traffic pattern tied to a device. Mitigations: batch checks across all credentials, randomize timing, route through the same CDN as everything else, and let the learner turn it off. Worth doing, worth documenting, and worth not pretending is free.


Bring it home — should Coursera build a wallet at all?
Here is the contrarian read, and I think it is the correct one. The wallet is the least defensible part of this stack and the most expensive to run. It is a consumer mobile app with key custody, a support burden, app-store release cycles, and a long tail of device-specific bugs — competing against Apple Wallet, Google Wallet, EUDI national wallets, and every government ID app, all of which will hold credentials eventually.
What is defensible is being the best issuer in the world: credentials so well-structured, so richly aligned to skills, and so honestly graded that every wallet wants them and every verifier trusts them.
Recommendation: ship a lightweight custodial web wallet for reach (weeks of work, not quarters), invest heavily in standards-compliant issuance and export, and defer a native mobile wallet until there is evidence learners want one that is not their government's or their phone vendor's. Module 10 sequences this explicitly, and it is the biggest single departure from the conventional roadmap.


If we fork MIT's wallet, what are we actually signing up for?
A React Native codebase, two app-store relationships, and an ongoing protocol-compatibility treadmill. Concretely: two annual OS major versions to chase, biometric and keystore API churn, OID4VCI/VP profile drift as the EU ecosystem iterates, credential-format additions (mdoc, SD-JWT VC), and a support queue where the top ticket will be "I got a new phone."
Call it 3–4 engineers steady-state after launch, not counting design and support. That is not an argument against doing it — it is an argument for knowing that a wallet is a product line with a permanent staffing commitment, not a project. Most organizations that regret building a wallet regret the year-three cost, not the year-one build.
The counter-argument in favor: forking gets you standards conformance and an education-native data model for free, and OpenWallet Foundation stewardship means you are contributing to a commons rather than to a competitor. If the strategic goal is credibility with university partners, that matters.


Q: Why must a learner's private key be generated on-device and never transmitted?  * Network transmission is slow and would hurt onboarding conversion
  * A key that touched a server could have been retained, meaning the issuer could impersonate learners — which makes the self-sovereignty claim theater (correct)
  * Regulations prohibit transmitting cryptographic material
  * Server-generated keys are cryptographically weaker
Explanation: The security property being claimed is that only the learner can present their credentials. If Coursera ever held the key, Coursera could forge presentations, and no verifier could tell the difference. Hardware-backed non-extractable storage extends this: malware can request signatures on the device but cannot exfiltrate the key and sign elsewhere forever.

Q: What is the pragmatic answer to key recovery for a large education issuer?  * Seed phrases, since they are fully self-sovereign
  * Mandatory social recovery with designated guardians
  * Hardware-backed keys plus optional encrypted backup, with frictionless reissuance designed as a first-class flow (correct)
  * Custodial key storage for all learners
Explanation: A decade of crypto-wallet evidence shows ordinary users lose seed phrases, and almost nobody designates guardians in advance. At Coursera's scale, reissuance will be the dominant recovery path by an enormous margin, so it should be a designed flow rather than a support escalation. It does quietly reintroduce issuer-side records — which is fine, as long as nobody pretends otherwise.

Q: What is the main lesson from ASU Pocket's deployment?  * Native mobile wallets outperform web wallets on adoption
  * Blockchain-based self-sovereign identity is required for university deployments
  * ASU shipped a wallet plus an issuer network plus a target population with a concrete use case — the wallet was the least interesting part (correct)
  * Open beta launches should precede standards compliance
Explanation: ASU paired ASU Pocket with the Trusted Learner Network and a focused career-mobility application (My Skills Pocket for retail workers). Funding the app while underfunding issuance and demand reproduces the field's most common failure: a well-built wallet with nothing worth putting in it.

Q: What is the contrarian recommendation about Coursera building a native wallet?  * Build it first, since credential storage is the core learner value
  * Build nothing and rely entirely on Apple and Google wallets
  * Ship a lightweight custodial web wallet for reach, invest heavily in standards-compliant issuance and export, and defer the native app until there is evidence of demand (correct)
  * Partner with ASU to white-label ASU Pocket
Explanation: A native wallet is a permanent product line — roughly 3–4 engineers steady-state, two app stores, OS churn, and a protocol treadmill — competing against Apple, Google, and EUDI national wallets. The defensible asset is being the best issuer: credentials so well-structured and richly skill-aligned that every wallet wants them and every verifier trusts them.

  * The six wallet components — Key store (hardware-backed, non-extractable), credential store (encrypted local DB), protocol handlers (OID4VCI/VP + deep links/QR), presentation engine (match, disclose, sign), backup & recovery, and trust/policy UI. Three are solved; recovery is why wallets are still bad.
  * Key management non-negotiables — Generate on device and never transmit. Hardware-backed and non-extractable (Secure Enclave / StrongBox). Bind signing to biometrics or passcode. Consider per-verifier pairwise DIDs, since one static did:key across every employer is a cookie that can't be cleared.
  * The four recovery options and their costs — Reissue from issuer (works; quietly reintroduces the issuer-controlled DB). Encrypted cloud backup (good UX; passphrase becomes the SPOF). Seed phrase (sovereign; catastrophic usability). Social recovery (elegant; requires guardians nobody designates). Pick reissuance and design it as a first-class flow.
  * MIT Learner Credential Wallet — Built by the Digital Credentials Consortium (US DOE grant funding from 2020), iOS + Android, supports W3C VCs and Open Badges 3.0. Stewardship transferred to the OpenWallet Foundation (Linux Foundation); code at openwallet-foundation-labs/learner-credential-wallet. Education-native, open source, shipped, neutrally governed.
  * ASU Pocket — ASU's VC wallet for badges, experiences, academic and employment records, encrypted on device. Open beta iOS + Android November 2023, paired with the Trusted Learner Network and My Skills Pocket for retail-worker career mobility. The organizational lesson beats the technical one.
  * The honest custodial-vs-self-sovereign call — A custodial web wallet will out-adopt a self-sovereign mobile wallet roughly 10x, because 'log in' beats 'install, secure a key, save a backup.' Ship the custodial web wallet for reach, support export to any compliant wallet for sovereignty, and never market custodial as self-sovereign.
  * Wallet-side revocation — Wallets don't enforce revocation — verifiers do. But a good wallet re-checks status lists in the background and warns the learner before an interview does. Cost: a device-linked traffic pattern. Mitigate by batching, randomizing timing, sharing a CDN, and letting learners disable it.






--------------------------------------------------------
Module 5: The Issuer Side — What Coursera Needs to Build
--------------------------------------------------------




This is the module that matters most, because issuance is the part Coursera is uniquely positioned to do well and the part nobody else can do on its behalf.


The issuance pipeline
---------------------


  1TriggerCompletion event. A learner finishes a course, specialization, or professional certificate. Emitted onto a durable queue — never issued synchronously in the request path.
  2GateEligibility & integrity check. Grades finalized? Honor-code flags clear? Payment settled? Refund window closed? This gate is what makes the credential worth signing — and the source of nearly every "why was I not issued" ticket.
  3AssembleClaim assembly. Pull achievement definition, skill alignments, assessment metadata, instructor, partner institution, effort hours. Resolve the learner's subject DID (or mint a placeholder if they have no wallet yet).
  4ValidateSchema validation. Validate against OB 3.0 before signing. A signed invalid credential is worse than no credential — it is a permanent, publicly verifiable bug.
  5AllocateStatus list index. Reserve an index in the current bitstring status list. Persist the mapping durably before signing, or you lose the ability to revoke.
  6SignSigning service. The only component with access to the private key. Takes a validated document, returns a secured credential. Small, boring, heavily audited, separately deployed.
  7DeliverOffer generation. Create an OID4VCI credential offer, plus a hosted fallback URL and a downloadable file. Not every learner has a wallet, and the ones who do not are the majority.
  8NotifyLearner notification. Email/in-app: what they earned, what it proves, how to claim it into a wallet, and how to share it. The step that determines whether any of the previous seven mattered.


The architectural rule: separate assembly from signing
Assembly is complex, changes often, and touches many systems. Signing is simple, changes rarely, and touches a private key. Putting them in one service means every schema change is a change to code with key access — and every one of those changes needs a security review.
Keep the signing service to a few hundred lines: accept a validated document plus a key identifier, return a secured credential. Everything interesting happens upstream. This is the same instinct that keeps payment code out of your product services, and it pays off the first time you need to rotate a key under pressure.


Signing infrastructure and the rotation problem
----------------------------------------


Coursera publishes did:web:coursera.org, resolved at https://coursera.org/.well-known/did.json:

/.well-known/did.json

---code---
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1",
    "https://w3id.org/security/multikey/v1"
  ],
  "id": "did:web:coursera.org",
  "verificationMethod": [
    {
      "id": "did:web:coursera.org#key-2026-01",
      "type": "Multikey",
      "controller": "did:web:coursera.org",
      "publicKeyMultibase": "z6MkhaXgBZDvotDkL5257faiztiGiC2QtKLGpbnnEGta2doK"
    },
    {
      "id": "did:web:coursera.org#key-2025-01",
      "type": "Multikey",
      "controller": "did:web:coursera.org",
      "publicKeyMultibase": "z6MkjchhfUsD6mmvni8mCdXHw216Xrm9bQe2mBH1P5RDjVJG"
    }
  ],
  "assertionMethod": [
    "did:web:coursera.org#key-2026-01",
    "did:web:coursera.org#key-2025-01"
  ]
}
---/code---


The rotation trap that will bite you exactly once
Rotate a signing key the way you would rotate a TLS certificate — remove the old one — and every credential ever signed with it becomes unverifiable. Not revoked. Unverifiable, which reads to a verifier as forged. At Coursera's volume that could be tens of millions of credentials broken by one deploy.
The rule: old verification methods are never deleted from the DID document. You stop signing with a retired key, but you keep publishing its public half forever. The document grows by one entry per rotation, which is fine — it is a few hundred bytes a year.
Corollary: if a key is ever compromised, removing it is not the fix either, because that invalidates legitimate historical credentials too. The fix is revoking the credentials fraudulently issued with it via the status list, and publishing the compromise window. Write that runbook before you need it.


Practical setup: private keys in a KMS or HSM (AWS KMS with Ed25519, or CloudHSM for stricter custody), one active signing key with a documented rotation cadence, and dual control on key operations. The signing service holds a key reference, never key material.


Schema design: what goes in a Coursera credential
----------------------------------------


This is where the strategy becomes a data structure. The default is a badge with a name and a date. The differentiated version carries provenance a verifier can reason about.

A Coursera OB 3.0 credential, with the fields that matter

---code---
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/credentials/v2",
    "https://purl.imsglobal.org/spec/ob/v3p0/context-3.0.3.json"
  ],
  "id": "urn:uuid:9f2a4c81-6b3e-4f77-9c21-8ad5e0e1b774",
  "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "OpenBadgeCredential"],
  "issuer": {
    "id": "did:web:coursera.org",
    "type": ["Profile"],
    "name": "Coursera",
    "url": "https://www.coursera.org"
  },
  "validFrom": "2026-08-05T14:22:00Z",
  "credentialSubject": {
    "type": ["AchievementSubject"],
    "id": "did:key:z6MkhaXgBZDvotDkL5257faiztiGiC2QtKLGpbnnEGta2doK",
    "achievement": {
      "id": "https://coursera.org/achievements/deep-learning-specialization",
      "type": ["Achievement"],
      "achievementType": "Certificate",
      "name": "Deep Learning Specialization",
      "description": "Five-course specialization covering neural networks, ...",
      "criteria": {
        "narrative": "Passed all 5 courses with a weighted average of 80% or
                      higher across 23 graded programming assignments and
                      12 quizzes. Identity verified at enrollment."
      },
      "alignment": [
        {
          "type": ["Alignment"],
          "targetName": "Deep Learning",
          "targetFramework": "Coursera Skills Taxonomy",
          "targetUrl": "https://coursera.org/skills/deep-learning"
        },
        {
          "type": ["Alignment"],
          "targetName": "Machine Learning",
          "targetFramework": "O*NET",
          "targetCode": "15-2051.01",
          "targetUrl": "https://www.onetonline.org/link/summary/15-2051.01"
        }
      ]
    },
    "result": [
      { "type": ["Result"], "achievedLevel": "Passed", "resultDescription": "..." }
    ]
  },
  "credentialStatus": {
    "id": "https://credentials.coursera.org/status/3#94567",
    "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
    "statusPurpose": "revocation",
    "statusListIndex": "94567",
    "statusListCredential": "https://credentials.coursera.org/status/3"
  },
  "proof": {
    "type": "DataIntegrityProof",
    "cryptosuite": "eddsa-rdfc-2022",
    "created": "2026-08-05T14:22:01Z",
    "verificationMethod": "did:web:coursera.org#key-2026-01",
    "proofPurpose": "assertionMethod",
    "proofValue": "z58DvkA9L2mHq..."
  }
}
---/code---


The assessment integrity tier — the differentiating design decision


Every credential should carry a machine-readable statement of how rigorously it was assessed. Not buried in prose — as a field a verifier can filter on.


Tier	|	What it means	|	Evidence carried	|	Employer read
T4 — Proctored	|	Identity-verified, proctored, timed assessment	|	Proctoring provider, identity-verification method, score band	|	Strongest — comparable to a certification exam
T3 — Auto-graded	|	Machine-graded programming assignments and quizzes with a pass threshold	|	Assignment count, threshold, weighted average band	|	Strong — demonstrates applied capability
T2 — Peer-reviewed	|	Human-reviewed submissions against a rubric	|	Rubric reference, reviewer count	|	Moderate — good for open-ended work, noisier signal
T1 — Completion	|	Content consumed; no meaningful assessment	|	Effort hours, modules completed	|	Participation — exposure, not capability


Why publishing a tier that includes an unflattering level is the strongest move available
The instinct is to make every credential look maximally impressive. Resist it. In a market with 1.85 million credentials, the issuer who tells you which of their credentials are weak is the issuer you believe about the strong ones.
Concretely: an employer filtering for T4 and T3 credentials gets a high-precision candidate pool. That employer now has a reason to prefer Coursera credentials over a competitor emitting undifferentiated badges — not because Coursera's badges are better on average, but because Coursera's badges are legible. Legibility is the moat. It is also the thing a competitor cannot copy quickly, because it requires actually having the assessment data.
The internal cost is real and worth naming: someone has to defend the tier assignments, and product teams will lobby for upgrades. Put the taxonomy under the same governance as academic integrity, not under marketing.


Batch issuance at Coursera scale
--------------------------------


Suppose the retroactive backfill is on the order of tens of millions of credentials. Where does that actually hurt?


Stage	|	Cost per credential	|	Bottleneck?
Ed25519 signature	|	Tens of microseconds	|	No — a single core does tens of thousands/sec
JSON-LD canonicalization (RDFC-1.0)	|	Single-digit to tens of milliseconds	|	Yes — often 100–1000x the signing cost
Context resolution over the network	|	Unbounded	|	Catastrophic if not pre-cached — and a liveness dependency on third-party hosts
Claim assembly (DB reads)	|	Milliseconds	|	Manageable with batching
Status list allocation	|	Microseconds, but contended	|	Needs care — pre-allocate index ranges per worker


The counter-intuitive result: the crypto is free, the JSON-LD is not
Engineers plan capacity around signature throughput and are then surprised. The real cost in a Data Integrity pipeline is RDF canonicalization — parsing JSON-LD, expanding contexts, and producing a deterministic N-Quads serialization before hashing.
Three mitigations, in order of impact:

  * Pin and pre-load every context locally. Never fetch @context URLs at signing time. This is both a performance fix and a security fix — a remote context is remote code execution over your semantics.

  * Consider JWT/SD-JWT securing for bulk issuance. VC-JOSE-COSE skips canonicalization entirely. Faster, simpler, and it buys SD-JWT selective disclosure. The trade: you give up Data Integrity's JSON-LD-native properties and BBS+ compatibility.

  * Parallelize by status-list shard so index allocation never contends across workers.


Rough shape: a backfill of tens of millions of credentials is a days-long batch job on a modest cluster if you do this right, and a multi-month ordeal if you canonicalize with remote contexts.


Retroactive issuance for existing completions
----------------------------------------


Millions of learners hold completions predating any of this. Backfilling is high-value — it is what makes a wallet non-empty on day one — and has three sharp edges:


  6. Date semantics. validFrom is when the credential became valid; the achievement date belongs in awardedDate on the subject. A 2019 completion issued in 2026 has a 2026 validFrom and a 2019 awardedDate. Conflating them produces credentials that look backdated, which reads as fraud.

  7. No subject DID. Historical learners have no wallet and no key. Two options: issue unbound credentials held in a custodial account and bind on first wallet claim, or defer issuance until claim. Prefer deferred issuance — it avoids minting tens of millions of credentials nobody ever claims, and avoids a bearer-credential population you would rather not have.

  8. Retroactive integrity. Data quality on old completions is worse: missing assessment metadata, deprecated courses, changed criteria. Either backfill at a lower, honestly labeled tier, or exclude records you cannot substantiate. Do not reconstruct criteria you do not have — a signed guess is still a signed statement.


The recommended backfill design
Lazy issuance with an eligibility index. Precompute, for every historical completion, whether it is credential-eligible and at what tier — a cheap batch job over existing data. Store that index. Issue the actual signed credential only when a learner claims it.
Benefits: no wasted signing, credentials bound to a real subject DID at creation, no orphan population, and the ability to fix schema mistakes before most credentials exist. Cost: claim latency of a few hundred milliseconds, which nobody will notice.


Coursera for Campus and Coursera for Business
----------------------------------------


Enterprise and campus change the issuer question, because the institution wants its name on the credential and often has accreditation standing that Coursera does not.


Model	|	Who signs	|	Verifier sees	|	When to use
Coursera as sole issuer	|	did:web:coursera.org	|	Coursera, with the partner named in the achievement	|	Default. Simplest, one key, one trust decision.
Sub-issuer DID	|	did:web:coursera.org:issuers:asu	|	A Coursera-hosted identity clearly scoped to the partner	|	Partner wants distinct identity without running infrastructure. The sweet spot.
Partner as issuer, Coursera as delivery	|	did:web:asu.edu	|	ASU	|	Accredited award where the institution must be the attesting party. Requires partner key custody.
Dual credentials	|	Both, separately	|	Two linked credentials	|	Both parties assert different things — Coursera the assessment, the institution the academic award.


The sub-issuer pattern is underrated. did:web supports path-based identifiers, so did:web:coursera.org:issuers:asu resolves to https://coursera.org/issuers/asu/did.json — a distinct identity with its own keys, hosted by Coursera, requiring zero partner infrastructure. It gives partners the branding and separation they want while keeping key custody in one operationally mature place.


Bring it home — the enterprise wedge nobody is talking about
For Coursera for Business, the compelling artifact is not the individual badge. It is the verifiable workforce skills record: a CLR that an enterprise can hold for its own workforce, showing verified skills across thousands of employees, portable into their HRIS, and re-verifiable without trusting Coursera's dashboard.
That flips the sale. Today the pitch is "your employees will learn things." The verifiable pitch is "you will have a cryptographically auditable record of what your workforce can actually do" — which speaks to compliance, workforce planning, and M&A diligence, and is a fundamentally different budget line than L&D. It also outlives the subscription, which is exactly why it is worth paying for.


Why not just let a vendor like Credly issue on our behalf?
It is a legitimate option and the fastest path to OB 3.0 issuance — Credly by Pearson was certified for Open Badges 3.0 on 27 January 2026 and operates the largest badge network, with 3,700+ issuers and a catalog around 200,000 credentials. If the goal is "issue standards-compliant badges this quarter," buying beats building.
What you give up is the thing this course argues is the actual asset. A vendor issues a generic badge from a generic template; the assessment-tier taxonomy, the skills-taxonomy alignments, and the evidence provenance are Coursera-specific data the vendor has no path to represent well. You would be outsourcing the commodity and the differentiator together.
The synthesis most large issuers land on: build the pipeline for your flagship credentials where provenance matters, and use a vendor for the long tail where a plain badge is genuinely sufficient. That also gives you a real interoperability test — if your credentials and the vendor's both land in the same wallet and verify, your standards conformance is not theoretical.


Q: Why must retired signing keys remain in the DID document forever?  * W3C DID Core requires that verification methods be immutable
  * Removing a retired key makes every credential ever signed with it unverifiable — which reads to a verifier as forged, not as expired (correct)
  * DID documents cannot be modified after publication
  * It allows the issuer to re-sign old credentials without reissuing
Explanation: This is the trap that bites once and hurts enormously: rotating a signing key like a TLS certificate would break tens of millions of historical credentials in one deploy. You stop signing with a retired key but keep publishing its public half. The same logic means removing a compromised key is not the fix either — revoke the fraudulent credentials via the status list instead.

Q: In a Data Integrity issuance pipeline at scale, what is the actual bottleneck?  * Ed25519 signature generation
  * JSON-LD canonicalization (RDFC-1.0), often 100–1000x the cost of the signature (correct)
  * Status list index allocation
  * Database reads during claim assembly
Explanation: Signing is tens of microseconds — a single core handles tens of thousands per second. Canonicalization is single-digit to tens of milliseconds. Worse, resolving @context URLs over the network is unbounded and is also a security problem, since a remote context is effectively remote code execution over your semantics. Pin contexts locally, or consider JWT/SD-JWT securing which skips canonicalization entirely.

Q: What is the recommended approach for backfilling credentials for millions of historical completions?  * Issue all credentials immediately as bearer credentials and bind them later
  * Lazy issuance: precompute an eligibility-and-tier index, then sign only when a learner claims (correct)
  * Issue only to learners who already have a wallet
  * Skip backfill entirely and issue going forward only
Explanation: Lazy issuance avoids minting tens of millions of credentials nobody claims, avoids an unbound bearer-credential population, binds each credential to a real subject DID at creation, and lets you fix schema mistakes before most credentials exist. The cost is a few hundred milliseconds of claim latency that nobody notices.

Q: Why should Coursera publish an assessment-integrity tier that explicitly includes a weak 'completion-only' level?  * Regulatory disclosure requirements mandate it
  * Because the issuer who tells you which of their credentials are weak is the issuer you believe about the strong ones — legibility is the moat (correct)
  * It reduces liability for credential misrepresentation
  * It allows charging different prices per tier
Explanation: In a market with 1.85 million credentials, an employer who can filter for proctored and auto-graded credentials gets a high-precision pool and a concrete reason to prefer Coursera over issuers emitting undifferentiated badges. A competitor cannot copy this quickly because it requires actually having the assessment data. Keep the taxonomy under academic-integrity governance, not marketing.

Q: What does the sub-issuer DID pattern (did:web:coursera.org:issuers:asu) give a university partner?  * Full custody of their own signing keys with no Coursera involvement
  * A distinct issuer identity with its own keys, hosted by Coursera, requiring zero partner infrastructure (correct)
  * The ability to revoke Coursera-issued credentials
  * A separate blockchain anchor for their credentials
Explanation: did:web supports path-based identifiers, so did:web:coursera.org:issuers:asu resolves to https://coursera.org/issuers/asu/did.json. The partner gets branding and identity separation while key custody stays in one operationally mature place. Partners who genuinely must be the attesting party for accreditation reasons need the full partner-as-issuer model instead.

  * The eight-stage issuance pipeline — Completion event → eligibility/integrity gate → claim assembly → schema validation → status list index allocation → signing service → OID4VCI offer generation → learner notification. Never issue synchronously in the request path.
  * Separate assembly from signing — Assembly is complex, changes often, touches many systems. Signing is simple, changes rarely, touches a private key. Combining them means every schema change is a change to key-access code requiring security review. Keep the signing service a few hundred lines: validated document + key ID in, secured credential out.
  * The key rotation rule — Never delete a verification method from the DID document. Stop signing with retired keys but keep publishing their public halves forever, or every credential signed with them becomes unverifiable — which reads as forged. Compromise is handled by revoking the fraudulent credentials, not by removing the key.
  * The four assessment integrity tiers — T4 Proctored (identity-verified, timed) → T3 Auto-graded (machine-graded with pass threshold) → T2 Peer-reviewed (rubric, human reviewers) → T1 Completion (content consumed, no meaningful assessment). Machine-readable and filterable, not buried in prose.
  * Batch issuance cost model — Ed25519 signing: tens of microseconds, not the bottleneck. JSON-LD canonicalization: 100–1000x that. Remote @context fetch: unbounded and a security hole. Fixes: pin contexts locally, consider JWT/SD-JWT securing to skip canonicalization, and pre-allocate status-list index ranges per worker.
  * Backfill date semantics — validFrom is when the credential became valid (2026); awardedDate on the subject is when the achievement happened (2019). Conflating them produces credentials that look backdated, which reads as fraud.
  * The four partner issuance models — Coursera sole issuer (default). Sub-issuer DID did:web:coursera.org:issuers:asu (the sweet spot — partner identity, zero partner infra). Partner as issuer did:web:asu.edu (needed when accreditation requires the institution to attest). Dual credentials (each party asserts different things).
  * The Coursera for Business wedge — Not individual badges — a verifiable workforce skills record (CLR) an enterprise holds for its own workforce, portable into their HRIS and re-verifiable without trusting a Coursera dashboard. Moves the sale from L&D ('employees will learn things') to compliance, workforce planning, and M&A diligence — a different budget line that outlives the subscription.






------------------------------------------------
Module 6: The Verifier Side — What Employers See
------------------------------------------------




Issuance without verification is a science project. This module is about the side of the market that decides whether any of the previous five modules produced value.


What "instant verification" actually means
----------------------------------------


The phrase gets used loosely. Precisely, a verifier performs six checks, and only one of them requires a network call that is not aggressively cacheable:


#	|	Check	|	Network?	|	Typical cost
1	|	Presentation signature valid, nonce fresh, domain matches	|	No	|	Microseconds
2	|	Resolve issuer DID → public key	|	Yes, cacheable for hours	|	~50 ms cold, 0 warm
3	|	Credential signature valid against that key	|	No	|	Microseconds
4	|	Status list bit not set	|	Yes, one fetch per ~131k credentials	|	~50 ms cold, 0 warm
5	|	validFrom / validUntil window, schema conformance	|	No	|	Microseconds
6	|	Do I trust this issuer?	|	Policy lookup	|	Depends entirely on your trust model


In steady state, verification is two cached fetches and some elliptic-curve math. Sub-millisecond warm. That is the number that changes employer behavior: verification stops being a procurement decision and becomes a line in a function.


Check 6 is the whole ballgame, and it is not cryptography
Checks 1–5 are mechanical and a library does them. Check 6 — should I believe did:web:coursera.org? — has no standardized answer, and it is where every real deployment stalls.
Today's practical answers are all unsatisfying: a hardcoded allowlist of known issuers, 1EdTech certification as a proxy, an accreditation database lookup, or "the domain is coursera.org and I have heard of Coursera." That last one is doing most of the work in practice, and it is precisely why did:web is the pragmatic choice for institutional issuers — it lets a verifier reuse the trust judgment they already make about domains.


Verification API design
-----------------------


Most verifiers will not implement checks 1–5 themselves in year one. They will call something. Designing that endpoint well is how Coursera stays in the loop without becoming a bottleneck.

POST https://verify.coursera.org/v1/verify

---code---
{
  "verifiablePresentation": { ... },
  "options": {
    "checkStatus": true,
    "challenge": "b3f1e7a2-...",
    "domain": "careers.acme-corp.com"
  }
}
---/code---


Response — note what is returned beyond a boolean

---code---
{
  "verified": true,
  "checks": {
    "presentationSignature": "valid",
    "holderBinding": "valid",
    "credentialSignature": "valid",
    "issuerResolved": "did:web:coursera.org",
    "revocationStatus": "active",
    "validityWindow": "in_range",
    "schemaConformance": "valid"
  },
  "credentials": [
    {
      "achievement": "Deep Learning Specialization",
      "awardedDate": "2026-06-14",
      "assessmentTier": "T3_AUTO_GRADED",
      "assessmentDetail": {
        "gradedAssignments": 23,
        "passThreshold": 0.80,
        "identityVerified": true
      },
      "skills": [
        { "name": "Deep Learning", "framework": "Coursera Skills Taxonomy" },
        { "name": "Machine Learning", "framework": "O*NET", "code": "15-2051.01" }
      ],
      "effortHours": 128,
      "partner": "DeepLearning.AI"
    }
  ],
  "warnings": []
}
---/code---


Four API design rules that matter more than the schema

  9. Never return a bare boolean. Return every check individually. A verifier with a compliance obligation needs to log which checks passed, and a partially-valid result (valid signature, expired window) is far more useful than false.

  10. Return warnings distinctly from failures. "Signed with a key retired in 2025" is a warning, not a failure. Collapsing the two makes verifiers reject legitimate credentials.

  11. Make the API stateless and side-effect free. No account required for basic verification. The moment verification requires an API key, you have rebuilt the business relationship the architecture eliminated.

  12. Publish an open-source client that does not call you. This is counter-intuitive and correct — see the callout below.


Ship a verifier library that does not need your API
The strongest possible move is to publish an open-source verification library that performs checks 1–5 entirely locally against your published DID document and status lists, with no call to Coursera at all.
Why give away the thing you might charge for? Because ubiquity of verification is worth more than revenue from verification. A credential's value is proportional to how many parties can check it without a prior relationship with you. Every gate you put in front of verification reduces that number. And if you do not publish the library, someone else will — the standards are open, so this is not a defensible chokepoint.
Charge for enrichment instead: skills-graph context, cohort percentiles, bulk operations, assessment provenance detail. Module 7 builds the commercial model on exactly that split.


Skills-based candidate search
-----------------------------


Once credentials carry alignment entries pointing at shared frameworks, a fundamentally different query becomes possible. Instead of "candidates who list PyTorch on a resume," a verifier can ask for candidates holding verified credentials aligned to a skill, above an assessment tier, within a recency window.

The query that only works if Module 2's alignment field was populated

---code---
SELECT candidates WHERE
  verified_credential.alignment INCLUDES 'onet:15-2051.01'
  AND verified_credential.assessmentTier >= 'T3'
  AND verified_credential.awardedDate > '2024-01-01'
  AND verified_credential.issuer IN trusted_issuer_registry
---/code---


Three preconditions, all of which are issuer-side decisions made in Module 5: alignments must be populated, the tier must be machine-readable, and issuer trust must be resolvable. Miss any one and the query degrades to string matching — which is what resumes already are.


Trust scoring: beyond the verified checkmark
----------------------------------------


A binary "verified" badge is a weak product. It answers "is this real?" while the employer is asking "is this good?"



    Signal 1
    Assessment depth
    The T1–T4 tier from Module 5. The single highest-information field, and the one competitors cannot fabricate without the underlying data.


    Signal 2
    Issuer standing
    Is the issuer accredited, 1EdTech-certified, present in a recognized registry? Independent of the individual credential.


    Signal 3
    Recency & decay
    A 2016 cloud certification and a 2026 one are not equivalent claims. Expose the date prominently rather than making the verifier compute relevance.


    Signal 4
    Cohort context
    "Top decile of 340,000 learners" is enormously more informative than "passed." Also the most privacy-sensitive — it must be learner-opt-in and selectively disclosable.



Do not ship a single composite trust score
The temptation is to collapse these into one number: "Coursera Trust Score: 87." Resist it, for three reasons.
It is unauditable. A candidate rejected because of an 87 cannot contest an opaque weighting, and in several jurisdictions automated employment decisions carry explainability obligations. It invites gaming. Any published composite becomes an optimization target within a quarter. And it makes Coursera the arbiter of candidate quality — a position with real legal exposure under emerging AI-hiring rules, including bias-audit requirements like NYC Local Law 144.
Expose the signals, let the verifier weight them, and keep the weighting on their side of the line. This is a legal architecture decision as much as a product one.


ATS integration — the unglamorous reality
----------------------------------------


Applicant tracking systems are where credentials must land to matter, and the honest status is: they do not speak Verifiable Credentials. Workday, Greenhouse, iCIMS, Lever and the rest have well-developed APIs for candidates, attachments, and custom fields, and essentially no native VC support.


Integration pattern	|	How it works	|	Effort	|	Fidelity
Verification receipt attachment	|	Candidate verifies via a hosted page; a signed PDF/JSON receipt attaches to the application	|	Low	|	Low — a human reads it
Custom field population	|	An integration writes verified skills into ATS custom fields the recruiter can filter on	|	Medium	|	Medium — filterable but lossy
Marketplace app	|	A native app in the Workday/Greenhouse marketplace performing verification in-flow	|	High	|	High — but per-ATS build and certification
Velocity Network relay	|	Publish into an HR-industry network that ATS vendors already integrate with	|	Medium	|	High — if the network has real reach


The sequencing that avoids sinking a year into integrations
Start with the verification receipt. It is unglamorous, works with every ATS ever built because it is an attachment, and requires zero partner engineering. It also generates the usage data you need to justify the deeper integrations.
Then go where the volume is, not where the standard is prettiest. Two or three ATS vendors cover the large majority of enterprise hiring; build a marketplace app for those. Treat Velocity Network as a parallel bet on the industry consolidating, not as the primary path.
The trap: building a beautiful OID4VP integration nobody can consume because the ATS has no place to put the result. The bottleneck is the recruiter's screen, not the protocol.


Bring it home — the demand-side chicken-and-egg
Coursera can unilaterally become an excellent issuer. It cannot unilaterally create verifiers. Every credentialing initiative that has failed, failed here.
Three levers Coursera has that most issuers do not:

  * Coursera for Business customers are employers. Thousands of enterprises already have a commercial relationship and a reason to verify their own workforce first. That is a captive verifier population — and internal verification (skills inventory, compliance, mobility) is an easier first use case than external hiring.

  * Coursera hiring partners and the job-board surface can require verified credentials in postings, creating learner-side pull.

  * Google Career Certificates are delivered on Coursera. Any large partner adopting verified issuance drags its own employer network along.


Sequence accordingly: verify inside enterprises first, hiring second. Do not launch by asking the open market to care.


What stops an employer from just calling our existing verification URL, like they do today?
Nothing, and that is exactly the point — today's URL check is a real product with real usage. The question is not whether it works but what it costs both sides.
The URL check requires Coursera to be online, reveals to Coursera which learner is being checked and by whom, cannot be automated at scale without rate limits and an agreement, works only for Coursera credentials, and returns a rendered page rather than structured data. It cannot answer "does this candidate hold any credential aligned to O*NET 15-2051.01 above tier T3," because the answer lives in a page, not a schema.
The VC path removes the online dependency, removes the privacy leak, makes automation free, works identically across issuers, and returns machine-readable skill alignments. Same question, four orders of magnitude cheaper, and answerable by software. That difference is what makes verification routine rather than exceptional — which is the entire thesis.


Q: In steady state, what does verifying a credential actually cost a verifier?  * One API call to the issuer per credential
  * Two aggressively cacheable fetches (issuer DID document and status list) plus local elliptic-curve math — sub-millisecond warm (correct)
  * A blockchain query with variable latency
  * A signed request to a trust registry for each check
Explanation: The issuer DID document is learner-independent and cacheable for hours; one status list fetch covers ~131,000 credentials. Everything else is local signature math. That collapse in cost is what turns verification from a procurement decision into a line in a function.

Q: Which verification check has no standardized answer and stalls most real deployments?  * Validating the credential's JSON schema
  * Checking the revocation status list
  * Deciding whether to trust the issuer at all — check 6 is policy, not cryptography (correct)
  * Verifying the holder's presentation signature
Explanation: Checks 1–5 are mechanical and a library handles them. 'Should I believe did:web:coursera.org?' has only unsatisfying answers today: hardcoded allowlists, 1EdTech certification as proxy, accreditation lookups, or simply recognizing the domain. That last one is doing most of the real work, which is why did:web suits institutional issuers — it reuses a trust judgment verifiers already make.

Q: Why should Coursera publish an open-source verifier library that performs all checks locally without calling Coursera?  * It reduces infrastructure costs for running a verification API
  * Because ubiquity of verification is worth more than revenue from it — a credential's value scales with how many parties can check it without a prior relationship (correct)
  * Open standards legally require reference implementations
  * It prevents competitors from building their own verifiers
Explanation: Every gate in front of verification reduces the number of parties who can check a credential, which reduces the credential's value. The standards are open, so verification is not a defensible chokepoint anyway — someone else will publish the library. Charge for enrichment (skills-graph context, cohort percentiles, bulk operations) rather than for the basic check.

Q: Why should Coursera avoid shipping a single composite 'trust score'?  * Composite scores are computationally expensive at scale
  * It is unauditable for rejected candidates, becomes an optimization target within a quarter, and makes Coursera the arbiter of candidate quality with legal exposure under AI-hiring rules (correct)
  * Employers prefer binary verified/unverified indicators
  * The W3C VC specification prohibits derived scores
Explanation: A candidate rejected because of an opaque 87 cannot contest the weighting, and automated employment decisions carry explainability and bias-audit obligations in several jurisdictions (NYC Local Law 144 among them). Expose the individual signals — assessment depth, issuer standing, recency, cohort context — and keep the weighting on the verifier's side of the line.

Q: What is the recommended first ATS integration pattern, and why?  * A native Workday marketplace app, since it has the highest fidelity
  * The verification receipt attachment — it works with every ATS ever built, needs zero partner engineering, and generates the usage data to justify deeper work (correct)
  * Velocity Network relay, since it reaches all ATS vendors at once
  * Direct OID4VP integration into each ATS
Explanation: ATSs do not speak Verifiable Credentials natively. A signed receipt attaches to an application like any other document, so it works everywhere immediately. The trap is building a beautiful OID4VP integration nobody can consume because the ATS has no place to put the result — the bottleneck is the recruiter's screen, not the protocol.

  * The six verification checks — (1) Presentation signature + nonce + domain. (2) Resolve issuer DID (cacheable hours). (3) Credential signature. (4) Status list bit (one fetch per ~131k credentials). (5) Validity window + schema. (6) Do I trust this issuer? — the only one that is policy rather than cryptography.
  * Four verification API design rules — Never return a bare boolean — return every check individually for compliance logging. Separate warnings from failures (a retired-key signature is a warning). Keep it stateless and key-free, or you rebuild the business relationship the architecture eliminated. Publish an open-source client that doesn't call you.
  * Why give away verification — A credential's value is proportional to how many parties can check it without a prior relationship with the issuer. Every gate reduces that number. The standards are open, so it isn't a defensible chokepoint anyway. Charge for enrichment — skills-graph context, cohort percentiles, bulk, provenance detail.
  * The four trust signals to expose (not to combine) — Assessment depth (T1–T4 tier), issuer standing (accreditation, 1EdTech certification, registry presence), recency and decay, and cohort context ('top decile of 340,000' — opt-in and selectively disclosable). Expose them separately; let the verifier weight them.
  * Four ATS integration patterns, ranked by sequencing — Verification receipt attachment (low effort, works everywhere — start here). Custom field population (medium, filterable but lossy). Marketplace app for Workday/Greenhouse (high effort, high fidelity, go where volume is). Velocity Network relay (a parallel bet on industry consolidation, not the primary path).
  * Coursera's three demand-side levers — C4B customers are employers with an existing relationship and a reason to verify their own workforce first. Hiring partners and job-board surfaces can require verified credentials, creating learner pull. Google Career Certificates are delivered on Coursera, so a large partner adopting drags its employer network along. Sequence: verify inside enterprises first, hiring second.






---------------------------------------------
Module 7: The Cloudflare Wallets Intersection
---------------------------------------------




Two different things are called a "wallet" in this course. One holds credentials, the other holds money. The interesting question is what happens where they meet — and the answer is more constrained than it first looks.


Two wallets, one word
---------------------


	|	Skills Wallet	|	Cloudflare Wallet
Holds	|	Verifiable Credentials	|	Spending authority over funds
Owner	|	A learner	|	A human account owner, delegating to agents
Standards	|	W3C VC 2.0, OB 3.0, OID4VP	|	x402 over HTTP, Web Bot Auth
Answers	|	"Can I prove I have this skill?"	|	"Can an agent pay for one request?"
Status (Aug 2026)	|	Specs final; issuance scaling	|	Sell side (Monetization Gateway) live since ~July 2026; buy side largely announced


They intersect at exactly one point: verification is an API call, and API calls can be priced. Everything in this module follows from that sentence — including its limits.


The x402 flow applied to verification
-------------------------------------


  1Agent → WorkerPOST /v1/verify/enriched with a Verifiable Presentation. No credentials, no account, no prior relationship.
  2Worker → Agent402 Payment Required with a PAYMENT-REQUIRED header carrying an accepts array: schemes, networks, assets, and amounts the endpoint will take.
  3AgentPicks a scheme it can satisfy and signs an authorization — fixed value, bounded validity window, nonce against replay.
  4Agent → WorkerRetries with PAYMENT-SIGNATURE.
  5Worker → Facilitator/verify then /settle. The Worker never touches a chain, a node, or a private key.
  6WorkerPerforms the actual credential verification — signature, status, enrichment.
  7Worker → Agent200 OK with the enriched result and a PAYMENT-RESPONSE receipt.


Why the 402 round trip is a first-contact cost, not a per-call cost
The PAYMENT-REQUIRED payload is stable per route. A well-built agent caches it after first contact and goes straight to a signed request thereafter. Keep your requirements stable enough to be cacheable and the extra round trip disappears from steady-state traffic.
Unit gotcha worth a test assertion: amounts are strings in the asset's smallest unit. With USDC's six decimals, "50000" is $0.05, not $50,000. This is a classic off-by-six.


A verification Worker with x402
-------------------------------


Cloudflare Worker — free basic tier, paid enrichment

---code---
const PRICE_USDC_BASE_UNITS = "50000"; // $0.05 — USDC has 6 decimals

export default {
  async fetch(request, env) {
    const url = new URL(request.url);
    const body = await request.json();

    // Tier 1: basic verification is ALWAYS free. This is strategic,
    // not generous — see the note below on why gating it is fatal.
    if (url.pathname === "/v1/verify") {
      return Response.json(await verifyPresentation(body, env));
    }

    // Tier 2: enriched verification is metered via x402.
    if (url.pathname === "/v1/verify/enriched") {
      const payment = request.headers.get("PAYMENT-SIGNATURE");

      if (!payment) {
        return new Response(null, {
          status: 402,
          headers: {
            "PAYMENT-REQUIRED": btoa(JSON.stringify({
              x402Version: 2,
              accepts: [{
                scheme: "exact",
                network: "base",
                asset: env.USDC_CONTRACT,
                amount: PRICE_USDC_BASE_UNITS,
                payTo: env.COURSERA_WALLET,
                resource: url.toString(),
                description: "Enriched credential verification",
                maxTimeoutSeconds: 60
              }]
            }))
          }
        });
      }

      // Facilitator does verify + settle. We never touch a chain.
      const settlement = await settleViaFacilitator(payment, env);
      if (!settlement.ok) return new Response("Payment failed", { status: 402 });

      const result = await verifyPresentation(body, env);
      const enriched = await enrich(result, env); // skills graph, percentile, provenance

      return Response.json(enriched, {
        headers: { "PAYMENT-RESPONSE": btoa(JSON.stringify(settlement.receipt)) }
      });
    }

    return new Response("Not found", { status: 404 });
  }
};
---/code---


Note what the Worker does not do: no node, no gas management, no private key, no invoicing, no metering service. The facilitator abstraction is what makes this adoptable by an ordinary backend team, and Cloudflare plays that role at the edge in its own stack.


The revenue model, with the skepticism it deserves
----------------------------------------


The seductive arithmetic: a million verifications a day at five cents is $50,000 a day, or roughly $18M a year. Before anyone puts that in a plan, interrogate the denominator.


Scenario	|	Daily paid verifications	|	At $0.05	|	Annual	|	Plausibility
Today's world (humans checking at offer stage)	|	~1,000–10,000	|	$50–$500	|	$18K–$180K	|	Near-certain — and not a business
Enterprise skills inventory (C4B workforce audits)	|	~50,000	|	$2,500	|	~$900K	|	Plausible — but better sold as a subscription
Agent-screened hiring (every application verified)	|	~1M	|	$50,000	|	~$18M	|	Speculative — requires agentic screening at scale
Ambient verification (every skill claim, everywhere)	|	~10M+	|	$500,000	|	~$180M	|	Fantasy without an ecosystem shift


The uncomfortable truth about the middle two rows
The agent-screened row is the whole thesis, and it depends on something Coursera does not control: employers deploying AI screening agents that verify claims rather than parsing resumes. That is a plausible 2027–2028 development, not an August 2026 fact.
Meanwhile the enterprise row — the one that is genuinely reachable — is better monetized as a seat-based or contract line in Coursera for Business than as micropayments. Enterprises hate unpredictable per-call billing and have procurement processes built around subscriptions. Charging an existing customer five cents a call to verify credentials you issued them would be a strange conversation.
So the honest conclusion: x402 verification is the right architecture for the agent segment specifically — anonymous, high-volume, no prior relationship, no procurement. It is the wrong billing model for the enterprise segment. Build the endpoint because the marginal cost is near zero and it positions you for the agent wave; do not put its revenue in next year's plan.


The rule that must not be broken
Basic verification is free, forever, with no key, no account, and no rate limit that a legitimate verifier would notice.
Charging to verify a credential you already issued and were already paid for is a trust-destroying move. It tells the ecosystem that Coursera credentials carry a toll, and a verifier facing a toll chooses the issuer without one. Given that a competent engineer can implement checks 1–5 locally from published open standards anyway, gating basic verification would cost you adoption and earn nothing.
Charge for enrichment — skills-graph context, cohort percentiles, assessment provenance, bulk operations, agent-scale throughput. Those are genuinely Coursera-only data products, and paying for them is a fair trade rather than a toll.


Why Workers specifically
------------------------


  * Verification is embarrassingly cacheable. DID documents and status lists are static artifacts fetched by every verifier — exactly what a CDN edge is for. Serving them from Workers with long cache TTLs makes the fetch effectively free and hides verifier IPs behind the edge, which is also the privacy mitigation from Module 3.

  * Verification is stateless and CPU-light. Signature checks and a bitstring lookup. No database in the hot path.

  * Global latency matters for a learner population that is majority outside the US.

  * x402 support is native at the edge as of Cloudflare's July 2026 Monetization Gateway, so pricing becomes configuration rather than code.


Bring it home — the two-sided position this creates
Coursera's unusual position is that it sits on both sides of the agentic credential economy. Sell side: it issues credentials and can meter enriched verification. Buy side: Coursera's own agents will increasingly need to pay for third-party APIs — labor-market data, assessment services, content licensing — per call rather than per contract.
The strategic move is not to bet on either half. It is to make sure the credential is agent-legible: structured, aligned to shared skill frameworks, verifiable without a human, and priced coherently at the enrichment boundary. If an agent screening 20,000 applications finds Coursera credentials trivially machine-verifiable and everyone else's require a human to squint at a PDF, the format advantage compounds long before the revenue does.
That is the real prize here, and it is a distribution prize, not a payments one.


Why not just use ordinary API keys and metered billing for the enrichment tier?
For enterprises, you should — that is the better model, as the table above argues. The x402 path is specifically for callers you have no relationship with and never will.
An API key presumes a prior agreement: someone signed up, agreed to terms, and got provisioned. That works for a hundred enterprise customers and fails for the case that motivates this entire module — an autonomous agent that discovers your verification endpoint mid-task, needs it once, and would happily pay five cents rather than open a business-development conversation. You cannot enumerate those callers in advance, which is exactly why pre-provisioning breaks down.
The honest framing: x402 is not a replacement for enterprise billing, it is a long-tail on-ramp. Run both. The 401-to-402 conversion is additive — existing authenticated partners with keys never see a 402, so nothing migrates and no partner needs to be told anything.


Q: Why must basic credential verification remain free and unkeyed?  * Cloudflare Workers cannot authenticate requests at the edge
  * Because a verifier facing a toll chooses the issuer without one — and since the standards are open, anyone can implement the checks locally anyway, so gating earns nothing and costs adoption (correct)
  * W3C requires free verification for conforming issuers
  * Free verification is required for GDPR compliance
Explanation: Charging to verify a credential you already issued and were paid for tells the ecosystem your credentials carry a toll. Since checks 1–5 can be implemented from published open standards against your public DID document and status lists, gating is not even enforceable. Charge for enrichment — skills-graph context, cohort percentiles, provenance, bulk — which is genuinely Coursera-only data.

Q: In the x402 flow, what does the facilitator abstraction let a verification Worker avoid?  * Verifying the credential's cryptographic proof
  * Running a blockchain node, managing gas, and holding a private key — verify and settle become ordinary HTTP calls (correct)
  * Caching the issuer's DID document
  * Handling the 402 response itself
Explanation: The Worker calls /verify and /settle and gets JSON back. It never touches a chain. That is what makes the protocol adoptable by an ordinary backend team, and it is the role Cloudflare plays at the edge in its own stack via the Monetization Gateway.

Q: A verification endpoint prices at amount '50000' with asset USDC. What is the price?  * $50,000
  * $500.00
  * $0.05 (correct)
  * $50.00
Explanation: Amounts are strings in the asset's smallest unit, and USDC has six decimals — so 50000 base units is 0.05 USDC, five cents. This off-by-six is a classic source of bugs; assert on it in tests.

Q: What is the honest assessment of x402 micropayment revenue from credential verification?  * It is a near-term $18M business at one million verifications per day
  * The reachable enterprise segment is better monetized as a subscription; x402 is the right architecture for the speculative agent segment, so build the endpoint but keep its revenue out of next year's plan (correct)
  * It will exceed subscription revenue within two years
  * It is not worth building until agentic screening is proven
Explanation: Today's human-driven verification volume is thousands per day — not a business. Enterprise workforce auditing is reachable but enterprises hate unpredictable per-call billing and it belongs in a C4B contract line. The million-per-day agent scenario depends on employers deploying AI screening agents, a plausible 2027–2028 development rather than an August 2026 fact. Build it because marginal cost is near zero and it positions you; don't forecast it.

  * The one point where the two wallets intersect — Verification is an API call, and API calls can be priced. Skills Wallet holds Verifiable Credentials (W3C VC 2.0, OB 3.0, OID4VP); Cloudflare Wallet holds delegated spending authority (x402, Web Bot Auth). Everything in Module 7 follows from that single sentence — including its limits.
  * The x402 verification flow — Request → 402 with PAYMENT-REQUIRED (accepts array) → agent signs authorization → retry with PAYMENT-SIGNATURE → Worker calls facilitator /verify then /settle → Worker verifies the credential → 200 with result plus PAYMENT-RESPONSE receipt. The 402 is a first-contact cost, not a per-call cost, since PAYMENT-REQUIRED is cacheable per route.
  * The revenue scenarios, honestly ranked — Today's human verification ~1–10k/day = $18–180K/yr (not a business). Enterprise skills inventory ~50k/day ≈ $900K (better as a subscription). Agent-screened hiring ~1M/day ≈ $18M (speculative, needs agentic screening at scale). Ambient verification ~10M/day ≈ $180M (fantasy without an ecosystem shift).
  * The rule that must not be broken — Basic verification is free forever — no key, no account, no rate limit a legitimate verifier would notice. Charging to verify a credential you already issued and were paid for is trust-destroying, and it isn't even enforceable since the standards are open. Charge for enrichment instead.
  * Why Cloudflare Workers for verification — DID documents and status lists are static artifacts fetched by every verifier — ideal CDN objects, and edge-serving also hides verifier IPs (the Module 3 privacy mitigation). Verification is stateless and CPU-light with no DB in the hot path. Global latency matters for a majority-non-US learner base. x402 is native at the edge since the July 2026 Monetization Gateway.
  * The real prize — distribution, not payments — Make the credential agent-legible: structured, skill-framework-aligned, verifiable without a human, coherently priced at the enrichment boundary. If an agent screening 20,000 applications finds Coursera credentials trivially machine-verifiable while everyone else's need a human to squint at a PDF, the format advantage compounds long before the revenue does.






-----------------------
Module 8: The Ecosystem
-----------------------




A map of who is building what, which bodies actually confer legitimacy, and where Coursera should show up versus merely watch.


Standards bodies and consortia
------------------------------


Organization	|	Owns	|	Why it matters to Coursera	|	Posture
W3C	|	VC Data Model 2.0, DIDs, Bitstring Status List, Digital Credentials API	|	The container everything else builds on. VC 2.0 became a Recommendation 15 May 2025.	|	Follow
1EdTech	|	Open Badges 3.0, CLR 2.0, and the certification program	|	The gate that matters in education. Certification is how partners and buyers judge conformance.	|	Join & certify
OpenID Foundation	|	OID4VCI 1.0 (final Sept 2025), OID4VP 1.0 (final 10 July 2025), SIOPv2	|	The transport every wallet and the EU stack speaks.	|	Follow
IETF	|	SD-JWT (RFC 9901, Nov 2025)	|	The practical selective-disclosure mechanism.	|	Follow
OpenWallet Foundation (Linux Foundation)	|	Stewards the Learner Credential Wallet and related OSS	|	Neutral home for wallet code — forking here is defensible with partners.	|	Contribute
Digital Credentials Commons (formerly DCC)	|	University consortium; built the LCW with US DOE funding from 2020	|	Where Coursera's degree partners already are.	|	Engage
Velocity Network Foundation	|	The "Internet of Careers" — a public permissioned network for career credentials	|	HR-side interoperability; members hold career data on 1B+ individuals.	|	Evaluate
Credential Engine	|	Credential Registry and CTDL; Counting Credentials research	|	Where a credential becomes publicly discoverable and describable.	|	Publish into


Velocity Network Foundation — the Internet of Careers
----------------------------------------


A non-profit membership organization operating a public permissioned blockchain for exchanging verifiable career credentials. Its pitch is HR-industry interoperability: members span HCM vendors, gig platforms, background and certification processors, education institutions, training vendors, and employers — collectively holding career data on more than a billion individuals.


The measured read
Velocity's strategic insight is right: the bottleneck is the HR side, not the education side. Universities have been issuing badges for a decade; the reason it did not matter is that no HR system consumed them. A network with HCM vendors as members attacks the correct problem.
Two reasons for caution. First, most of the publicly visible material dates from 2020–2022; verify current member composition and live transaction volume directly before committing — a network's value is entirely its reach, and reach is exactly what press releases overstate. Second, the ledger component adds a governance and operational story you would otherwise not need, since VCs verify perfectly well without one.
Recommendation: engage as an observer or associate member, publish credentials in standard formats that a Velocity relay can pick up, and let membership follow demonstrated ATS pull rather than lead it. Do not architect around it.


Platforms and issuers
---------------------


Player	|	Position	|	OB 3.0 status	|	Relevance
Credly by Pearson	|	The largest badge network — 3,700+ issuers, ~200,000 credentials in catalog, 85% of top IT certifications	|	Certified 27 Jan 2026	|	The default incumbent. Also powers the Google Cloud Credential Wallet.
Accredible	|	Certificates and badges for education and associations	|	OB 3.0	|	Common in higher-ed procurement bake-offs
Canvas Credentials (Instructure, formerly Badgr)	|	Badging tied to the dominant higher-ed LMS	|	OB 3.0	|	LMS-adjacent distribution — credentials issued where coursework already lives
Territorium	|	CLR-first learner records	|	CLR 2.0 + OB 3.0 certified	|	One of the few with real CLR 2.0 implementation experience
POK	|	Blockchain-anchored credentials	|	OB 3.0	|	Ledger-anchoring niche
ASU / Trusted Learner Network	|	Institution running its own issuance + wallet	|	VC-native	|	The reference deployment for a university-scale program


Note who is not on this list: LinkedIn
The most widely used repository of skill claims on earth issues no verifiable credentials and consumes none. That is either the biggest gap in the ecosystem or evidence that verifiability is not what the market rewards. Module 9 argues it is genuinely both — and that the resolution depends on who does the screening.


Credential Engine and the discovery layer
----------------------------------------


Credential Engine maintains the Credential Registry and the Credential Transparency Description Language (CTDL). Its Counting Credentials 2025 report (December 2025) found 1,850,034 unique US credentials from 134,000+ providers, against $2.34 trillion invested annually in US education and workforce development.

The distinction that matters architecturally: Credential Engine describes credential types; Verifiable Credentials assert instances. The registry says "this certificate exists, here is what it requires, here are the skills it maps to." A VC says "this person earned it." They are complementary, and the pairing is powerful — a verifier resolving an achievement URI into a registry description gets independent third-party context on what the credential means, from someone other than the issuer.

Publishing Coursera's credential catalog into the Credential Registry with CTDL descriptions is comparatively cheap and makes credentials discoverable to state talent marketplaces and workforce systems that query the registry directly — including the ones being funded right now.


Public-sector programs shaping demand
-------------------------------------



    United States
    Connecting Talent to Opportunity Challenge
    A $15M US Department of Education prize competition inviting state Governors to assemble teams building or scaling Talent Marketplaces — combining a credential registry, Learning and Employment Records (LERs), and skills-based job-description generators. Three phases, up to 10 semifinalists and finalists sharing the prize pool with technical assistance. This is federal money creating verifier demand at the state level.


    European Union
    EDC, ELM, and the EUDI Wallet
    European Digital Credentials for Learning are the EU's format for diplomas, certificates, and micro-credentials, described using the European Learning Model. All 27 member states must offer a compliant EUDI Wallet by December 2026 — a legal mandate, though national readiness varies and several states have signaled limited launch functionality.



Bring it home — why the EU deadline is the forcing function
The December 2026 EUDI mandate creates something that has never existed: hundreds of millions of people with a government-issued credential wallet already on their phone. The chronic chicken-and-egg — no wallets, so no point issuing; no credentials, so no point installing — is being broken by regulation in one of Coursera's largest markets.
Two concrete implications. First, EU learners will have a wallet whether or not Coursera builds one, which strengthens the Module 4 argument for deprioritizing a native app. Second, being EDC/ELM-mappable is not a nice-to-have for the European business — institutions operating under EU frameworks will increasingly expect it, and a proprietary format is simply not admissible into a EUDI wallet.
My read on sequencing: the EU is where a verifiable-credentials program has the clearest, date-certain business case. The US case rests on employer behavior change; the EU case rests on a legal deadline that already passed through the legislature.


Do we need to join 1EdTech, or is conformance enough?
Conformance is what makes the credentials work. Certification is what makes people believe they work, and in education procurement the difference is decisive.
1EdTech certification is a listed, checkable status. When a university's procurement team or a state workforce agency asks "is this Open Badges 3.0 compliant," a certification listing ends the conversation; an engineer's assurance does not. Credly by Pearson certified on 27 January 2026 and Territorium certified for both CLR 2.0 and OB 3.0 — in a bake-off, an uncertified competitor is answering questions the certified ones are not.
Cost is modest relative to the credibility, and the certification suite doubles as a genuinely useful conformance test harness during development. Do it in Phase 1, not later.


Q: What is the architectural relationship between Credential Engine's registry and Verifiable Credentials?  * They are competing approaches to credential verification
  * Credential Engine describes credential types (what a certificate requires and maps to); VCs assert instances (this person earned it) — they are complementary (correct)
  * Credential Engine issues the VCs on behalf of providers
  * VCs replaced the registry model after W3C VC 2.0 reached Recommendation
Explanation: The registry plus CTDL says a credential type exists and what it means; a VC says a specific person earned it. Pairing them is powerful because a verifier resolving an achievement URI into a registry description gets independent third-party context on the credential's meaning — from someone other than the issuer.

Q: Why is the EU's December 2026 EUDI Wallet mandate the clearest forcing function in this space?  * It requires all EU universities to issue verifiable credentials
  * It breaks the chicken-and-egg problem by putting a credential wallet on hundreds of millions of phones by regulation, in one of Coursera's largest markets (correct)
  * It bans PDF certificates across the EU
  * It creates a single EU-wide credential registry
Explanation: All 27 member states must offer a compliant wallet by December 2026. That eliminates the 'no wallets so no point issuing / no credentials so no point installing' deadlock by law. It also strengthens the case for deprioritizing a native Coursera wallet, and makes EDC/ELM mappability a requirement rather than a nice-to-have — proprietary formats aren't admissible into a EUDI wallet.

Q: What is the recommended posture toward Velocity Network Foundation?  * Join as a full member immediately and architect the credential pipeline around it
  * Ignore it — blockchain-based career networks have no future
  * Engage as observer, publish in standard formats a relay can pick up, and let membership follow demonstrated ATS pull rather than lead it (correct)
  * Build a competing network with Coursera's enterprise customers
Explanation: Velocity's core insight is right — the bottleneck is HR-side, not education-side, and its members hold career data on 1B+ individuals. But much of the public material dates from 2020–2022, so verify current membership and live volume before committing, since a network's entire value is its reach. Publish standards-compliant credentials that a relay can consume, and don't architect around it.

Q: Why pursue 1EdTech certification rather than relying on conformance alone?  * Certification is legally required to issue Open Badges 3.0
  * Conformance makes credentials work; certification is a listed, checkable status that ends procurement conversations — and the test suite doubles as a conformance harness (correct)
  * Only certified issuers can publish to the Credential Registry
  * Certification grants access to 1EdTech's verification infrastructure
Explanation: In education procurement the difference is decisive: when a university or state workforce agency asks whether something is OB 3.0 compliant, a certification listing ends the conversation and an engineer's assurance does not. Credly certified 27 January 2026 and Territorium holds both CLR 2.0 and OB 3.0 — in a bake-off, an uncertified competitor is answering questions the certified ones are not.

  * Which bodies to join versus follow — Join and certify: 1EdTech (the gate that matters in education). Contribute: OpenWallet Foundation. Engage: Digital Credentials Commons (where degree partners already are). Publish into: Credential Engine. Follow: W3C, OpenID Foundation, IETF. Evaluate cautiously: Velocity Network.
  * Velocity Network Foundation — the measured read — Right insight: the bottleneck is HR-side, not education-side, and members hold career data on 1B+ individuals. Cautions: much public material dates from 2020–2022 (verify current reach), and the ledger adds governance you don't otherwise need. Engage as observer, publish standards-compliant credentials, let membership follow ATS pull.
  * Credly by Pearson — The largest badge network — 3,700+ issuers, ~200,000 credentials in catalog, 85% of top IT certifications. Certified for Open Badges 3.0 on 27 January 2026. Also powers the Google Cloud Credential Wallet. The default incumbent in any procurement bake-off.
  * Registry vs credential — the distinction — Credential Engine's registry + CTDL describes credential TYPES (what this certificate requires, what skills it maps to). A VC asserts an INSTANCE (this person earned it). Complementary: a verifier resolving the achievement URI gets third-party context on meaning from someone other than the issuer.
  * US DOE Connecting Talent to Opportunity Challenge — $15M prize competition inviting state Governors to build or scale Talent Marketplaces combining a credential registry, Learning and Employment Records, and skills-based job-description generators. Three phases, up to 10 semifinalists/finalists. Federal money creating verifier demand at the state level.
  * EU stack: EDC, ELM, EUDI — European Digital Credentials for Learning = the format for diplomas, certificates, micro-credentials. European Learning Model = the multilingual vocabulary describing them. EUDI Wallet = mandatory in all 27 member states by December 2026 (readiness varies, deadline is law). The clearest date-certain business case in the space.






------------------------------
Module 9: Competitive Analysis
------------------------------




The incumbent in skills verification is not another course platform. It is a social network that verifies nothing and wins anyway.


LinkedIn — the incumbent to actually worry about
----------------------------------------


LinkedIn holds the world's largest repository of skill claims, a skills graph mapping people to skills to jobs, and — decisively — it is where the hiring workflow already happens. Recruiters live there. Candidates maintain profiles there. Coursera already integrates with it: on completing a Google Career Certificate, learners get a link to import the credential badge into LinkedIn's Licenses & Certifications section.


Dimension	|	LinkedIn	|	A verifiable Skills Wallet
Distribution	|	Overwhelming	|	Starting from zero
Recruiter workflow integration	|	It is the workflow	|	None
Cryptographic verification	|	None — claims are self-reported	|	Native
Assessment provenance	|	Absent	|	Machine-readable tier + evidence
Learner ownership	|	LinkedIn-owned profile	|	Learner-held credential
Cross-platform portability	|	Locked in	|	Standards-based


The uncomfortable strategic fact
LinkedIn wins on the only dimension that has mattered so far. A self-reported certification on a LinkedIn profile influences more hiring decisions today than every verifiable credential ever issued, combined. Not because it is trustworthy, but because it is where the recruiter is looking.
Any strategy premised on "verifiable credentials will displace LinkedIn profiles" is wrong. The correct framing is that verifiable credentials are a trust layer that can sit underneath any surface, including LinkedIn's. The goal is not to replace the profile; it is to make the entry on the profile checkable.
The scenario where this flips is the one from Module 1: when screening moves from a recruiter skimming profiles to an agent processing applications, self-reported claims become a liability rather than a shortcut, because the agent can verify at zero marginal cost and will start discounting anything it cannot. Coursera's bet is on that transition. It should be stated as a bet, not as a certainty.


Google — the partner who is also a competitor
----------------------------------------


Google occupies an unusual position: Google Career Certificates are delivered on Coursera, making Google simultaneously one of the largest content partners and a credential brand with its own distribution ambitions.


  * Google Career Certificates — the 2026 catalog spans Advanced Data Analytics, Business Intelligence, IT Automation with Python, alongside foundational Data Analytics, Project Management, and IT Support. Non-expiring, and delivered through Coursera.

  * Google Cloud Credential Wallet — launched for Google Cloud credential holders, powered by Credly, with Labor Market Insights surfacing job opportunities, titles, employers, and salary data against verified skills.

  * Google Wallet — increasingly a container for identity documents, and the obvious eventual home for credentials on Android.


What the Credential Wallet choice tells you
Google built a credential wallet and did not build the credential infrastructure — it used Credly. That is a company with unlimited engineering capacity concluding that badge issuance is not worth owning.
Two readings, and both are worth holding. The pessimistic one: credential issuance is a commodity, and Coursera building it in-house is undifferentiated work. The optimistic one, which I find more persuasive: Google's credentials do not carry deep assessment provenance, so a generic badge platform is genuinely sufficient for them. Coursera's flagship credentials do have that provenance — graded assignments, proctored exams, partner governance — and representing it is exactly what a generic platform cannot do.
The strategic tell to watch: the Labor Market Insights layer. Google is attaching labor-market context to credentials, which is the same enrichment play Module 6 recommends. That is the competition worth tracking — not badge issuance.


edX / 2U and the rest of the online-education field
----------------------------------------


edX's verified certificates use ID verification at enrollment, which is a genuine integrity signal, but the credential artifact remains a hosted page rather than a portable Verifiable Credential. 2U's financial difficulties have limited investment in forward-looking credential infrastructure.

The broader field — Udacity, Udemy, Pluralsight, LinkedIn Learning — is largely in the same position: certificates as marketing artifacts rather than verifiable claims. This is a genuine opening. There is no online-learning platform at Coursera's scale with a serious verifiable-credentials program, which means first-mover advantage in this category is real and currently unclaimed.


Canvas Credentials and the LMS flank
------------------------------------


Instructure's Canvas Credentials (formerly Badgr) issues Open Badges 3.0 from inside the dominant higher-education LMS. That is a structurally strong position: credentials issued where the coursework already lives, with no integration required by the institution.

For Coursera this is the flank to watch. If universities issue verifiable credentials natively from Canvas for their own coursework, the Coursera-delivered credential becomes one input among many rather than the record itself — and the aggregation layer (CLR) moves to the LMS. Two responses, and they are not exclusive: make Coursera credentials trivially ingestible into institutional records, and compete on the assessment provenance an LMS badge cannot carry.


Where Coursera actually differentiates
--------------------------------------



    Asset 1
    Assessment depth
    Proctored exams, auto-graded programming assignments, identity verification. The T1–T4 tier from Module 5 is only expressible by an issuer that has the underlying data. This is the moat.


    Asset 2
    Partner governance
    University and industry partners with accreditation standing. A credential co-signed by a recognized institution answers the trust-registry problem that has no general solution.


    Asset 3
    Skills taxonomy
    An existing skills mapping across the catalog. Emitting it as alignment makes credentials machine-comparable while competitors emit bare strings. Cheap to build, hard to copy.


    Asset 4
    Two-sided reach
    Millions of learners on one side, thousands of enterprises on the other. Almost nobody else can seed both issuance and verification from inside one customer base.



The three ways this loses, stated plainly
1. Nobody verifies. Coursera issues beautiful credentials into a market that keeps hiring on resumes and LinkedIn profiles. Mitigation: seed verification inside Coursera for Business before asking the open market to care. This is the most likely failure mode.
2. A neutral utility wins the layer. Credly, Google, or a government wallet becomes the default container, and Coursera is one issuer among thousands with no special position. Mitigation: do not fight for the container — win on credential quality and be present in every container.
3. Coursera builds a wallet nobody installs. Engineering goes into a consumer app competing with Apple, Google, and EUDI national wallets. Mitigation: Module 4's recommendation — custodial web wallet for reach, defer the native app.


Bring it home — the positioning statement
Not "Coursera has a credential wallet." That is a feature claim, easily matched, and it competes on the layer Coursera is weakest at.
"A Coursera credential is the most trustworthy machine-readable claim about a person's skills that exists — because it carries the assessment behind it, and any system can check it in a millisecond without asking us."
That is a claim only an issuer with real assessment infrastructure can make, it is verifiable rather than aspirational, and it wins in exactly the world Module 1 argues is arriving: one where the entity reading the credential is software.


If LinkedIn added verifiable credential support tomorrow, is this whole program dead?
No — it would be the single best thing that could happen to it.
LinkedIn adding VC support would make it a verifier, and verifiers are the scarce resource. Coursera would remain the issuer, and the trust layer under a LinkedIn "verified" checkmark would be Coursera's signature and Coursera's assessment provenance. The value of being a high-quality issuer goes up when a high-distribution surface starts checking, because it finally makes the difference between a rigorous credential and a completion certificate visible where hiring decisions get made.
The scenario that actually threatens the program is the opposite: LinkedIn becoming an issuer of assessed credentials with its own verification, capturing both sides. LinkedIn Learning plus LinkedIn Skill Assessments is the seed of that, and it is worth watching. But it would require LinkedIn to build assessment rigor it has shown little appetite for, in a business with much worse margins than advertising and recruiter seats.


Q: What is the correct strategic framing of verifiable credentials relative to LinkedIn?  * Verifiable credentials will displace LinkedIn profiles as the primary hiring surface
  * Verifiable credentials are a trust layer that can sit underneath any surface including LinkedIn's — the goal is to make the profile entry checkable, not to replace the profile (correct)
  * LinkedIn and verifiable credentials serve entirely separate markets
  * Coursera should build a competing professional network
Explanation: A self-reported certification on LinkedIn influences more hiring decisions today than every verifiable credential ever issued, because it is where the recruiter is looking. Any strategy premised on displacement is wrong. The flip comes when screening moves from recruiters skimming profiles to agents that verify at zero marginal cost — and that should be stated as a bet, not a certainty.

Q: Google built its Cloud Credential Wallet on Credly rather than building credential infrastructure. What is the most persuasive reading?  * Credential issuance is a pure commodity and building it in-house is always wasteful
  * Google's credentials do not carry deep assessment provenance, so a generic badge platform suffices — whereas Coursera's flagship credentials do, and a generic platform cannot represent that (correct)
  * Google plans to acquire Credly
  * Google lacked the engineering capacity to build it
Explanation: Both readings deserve holding, but the second is stronger. The strategic tell to watch is not badge issuance — it is the Labor Market Insights layer attaching labor-market context to credentials, which is the same enrichment play Module 6 recommends. That is the real competition.

Q: Which is identified as the most likely way a Coursera Skills Wallet program fails?  * Coursera builds a wallet nobody installs
  * A neutral utility like Credly or a government wallet wins the container layer
  * Nobody verifies — beautiful credentials issued into a market that keeps hiring on resumes and LinkedIn profiles (correct)
  * Standards fragmentation makes credentials non-portable
Explanation: Issuance is unilateral; verification is not. Every credentialing initiative that has failed, failed on the demand side. The mitigation is to seed verification inside Coursera for Business — where thousands of enterprises already have a commercial relationship and a reason to verify their own workforce — before asking the open market to care.

Q: Why would LinkedIn adding verifiable credential support be good news for Coursera?  * It would let Coursera deprecate its own wallet plans
  * It would make LinkedIn a verifier — the scarce resource — with Coursera's signature and assessment provenance as the trust layer under the checkmark (correct)
  * It would force LinkedIn to license Coursera's skills taxonomy
  * It would eliminate self-reported claims from the market
Explanation: Verifiers are scarce; issuers are not. A high-distribution surface that starts checking makes the difference between a rigorous credential and a completion certificate visible exactly where hiring decisions happen. The genuinely threatening scenario is the opposite — LinkedIn becoming an issuer of assessed credentials and capturing both sides.

  * LinkedIn's position, honestly — Wins overwhelmingly on distribution and recruiter workflow — the only dimensions that have mattered so far. Loses on cryptographic verification, assessment provenance, learner ownership, and portability. A self-reported cert on LinkedIn influences more hiring today than every VC ever issued, because it is where the recruiter looks.
  * Google's dual role — Google Career Certificates are delivered ON Coursera, making Google a top content partner and a credential brand at once. Google Cloud Credential Wallet is powered by Credly with Labor Market Insights. Google Wallet is the eventual Android credential container. Watch the enrichment layer, not the badge issuance.
  * Coursera's four differentiating assets — (1) Assessment depth — proctored exams, auto-graded assignments, identity verification; only expressible by an issuer that has the data. (2) Partner governance with accreditation standing. (3) An existing skills taxonomy to emit as alignment. (4) Two-sided reach — millions of learners and thousands of enterprises in one customer base.
  * The three failure modes — (1) Nobody verifies — most likely; mitigate by seeding verification inside C4B first. (2) A neutral utility wins the container layer; mitigate by not fighting for the container and being present in all of them. (3) Coursera builds a wallet nobody installs; mitigate with a custodial web wallet and a deferred native app.
  * The positioning statement — Not 'Coursera has a credential wallet' — a feature claim competing on Coursera's weakest layer. Instead: 'A Coursera credential is the most trustworthy machine-readable claim about a person's skills that exists — because it carries the assessment behind it, and any system can check it in a millisecond without asking us.'
  * Canvas Credentials — the LMS flank — Instructure issues OB 3.0 from inside the dominant higher-ed LMS, so credentials originate where coursework already lives with no institutional integration needed. If universities issue natively from Canvas, the Coursera credential becomes one input among many and the CLR aggregation layer moves to the LMS. Respond by being trivially ingestible and competing on provenance.






------------------------------------------
Module 10: Coursera Implementation Roadmap
------------------------------------------




Five phases over eighteen months, with the phase-two departure from conventional wisdom flagged loudly, and explicit criteria for killing the program.


How to read the estimates
Engineering counts below are directional, outside-in estimates from someone without visibility into Coursera's internal systems, team topology, or existing credential infrastructure. Treat them as a starting shape for a planning conversation, not as a bid. The relative sizing between phases is more reliable than the absolute numbers, and the sequencing logic is the part worth arguing about.



    Phase 1
    Become an excellent issuer
    Months 0–3

  Everything downstream depends on this and nothing downstream substitutes for it. If only one phase ships, this is the one that creates value on its own.

      * Publish did:web:coursera.org with a documented key-rotation policy and the never-delete rule enforced in code review.

      * KMS/HSM-backed signing service — small, separately deployed, dual-controlled, audited.

      * Open Badges 3.0 issuance for new completions, with criteria and alignment populated, not stubbed.

      * Assessment integrity tier (T1–T4) as a machine-readable field, governed by academic integrity rather than marketing.

      * Bitstring status list infrastructure, CDN-served, with a written revocation policy answering "what would make us revoke?"

      * Hosted verification page plus an open-source verifier library that does not call Coursera.

      * 1EdTech OB 3.0 certification — start the process in week two, not month three.

      * Publish the credential catalog into Credential Engine with CTDL descriptions.


  ~6–8 engineers (2 crypto/security, 3 backend, 1 frontend, 1–2 data for taxonomy alignment) + PM + academic-integrity stakeholder.
  Exit criteria: a third party verifies a Coursera credential using only published standards and a library they did not get from Coursera.



    Phase 2
    Lightweight wallet + delivery (revised from the conventional plan)
    Months 3–9


    The departure, stated explicitly
    The conventional Phase 2 is "fork MIT's Learner Credential Wallet and ship a native app in six months." I recommend against leading with that.
    A native wallet is a permanent product line — roughly 3–4 engineers steady-state, two app stores, OS churn, a protocol treadmill, and a support queue whose top ticket is "I got a new phone" — competing against Apple Wallet, Google Wallet, and EUDI national wallets that all 27 EU member states must ship by December 2026. Learners in Coursera's largest markets will have a wallet regardless.
    Do this instead: a custodial web wallet for reach plus OID4VCI export so any standards-compliant wallet can hold a Coursera credential. Weeks of work rather than quarters, and it makes the native-app decision a data-driven one in Phase 4 rather than a bet made now.


      * Custodial web wallet: log in, see credentials, share a link, download the credential file. Honest UI labelling about custody.

      * OID4VCI issuance endpoint so any conforming wallet — LCW, ASU Pocket, a EUDI wallet — can claim a Coursera credential.

      * OID4VP presentation support for verifier-initiated requests.

      * Lazy retroactive issuance: eligibility-and-tier index over historical completions, signing on claim.

      * Legacy Open Badges 2.0 import, so a wallet is not empty on first open.

      * Instrument everything: claim rate, wallet choice, share events, verification events. This data decides Phase 4.


  ~8–10 engineers (5 backend/protocol, 3 frontend, 1 data) + PM + design.
  Exit criteria: a learner claims a Coursera credential into a third-party wallet and presents it to a third-party verifier successfully.



    Phase 3
    CLR 2.0 and multi-source aggregation
    Months 9–15


      * CLR 2.0 issuance bundling course, specialization, and degree credentials with defined associations.

      * Import of third-party credentials into the learner record — with correct semantics: bundling is assembly, not attestation, and every inner credential verifies independently.

      * Coursera for Business workforce skills record — enterprise-held CLRs across their workforce, exportable to HRIS. This is the commercial centrepiece of the phase.

      * Sub-issuer DIDs (did:web:coursera.org:issuers:) for campus and enterprise partners.

      * EDC/ELM mapping for the European business, ahead of the December 2026 EUDI deadline.

      * 1EdTech CLR 2.0 certification.


  ~10–12 engineers + enterprise PM + partner solutions engineering.
  Exit criteria: an enterprise customer verifies its own workforce's skills from a CLR without using a Coursera dashboard.



    Phase 4
    Verification API, enrichment, and x402
    Months 12–18


      * Production verification API on Cloudflare Workers — basic tier free and unkeyed, permanently.

      * Enriched tier: skills-graph context, cohort percentiles (opt-in), assessment provenance detail, bulk operations.

      * x402 metering on the enriched tier for agent traffic; conventional contract billing for enterprises. Both, not one.

      * Edge-cached DID documents and status lists — performance and the Module 3 privacy mitigation in one move.

      * Native wallet decision gate using Phase 2 instrumentation: if a meaningful share of learners claim into third-party wallets, do not build a native app.


  ~6–8 engineers (3 edge/platform, 2 data/enrichment, 1–2 payments integration) + PM.
  Exit criteria: a third-party agent verifies a credential and pays for enrichment with no prior Coursera relationship.



    Phase 5
    Ecosystem and ATS distribution
    Months 15–24


      * Verification receipt attachment flow — works with every ATS, zero partner engineering. Ship first.

      * Marketplace apps for the two or three ATS platforms covering the majority of enterprise hiring volume.

      * Velocity Network engagement, sized to demonstrated ATS pull rather than to the pitch.

      * State talent-marketplace integration, tracking US DOE Connecting Talent to Opportunity Challenge outcomes.

      * EUDI wallet interoperability testing against national implementations.


  ~6–8 engineers + partnerships + solutions engineering.
  Exit criteria: a hiring manager sees a verified Coursera credential inside their ATS without leaving it.


Cumulative investment shape
---------------------------


Phase	|	Window	|	Eng (peak)	|	Eng-months	|	Value created on its own
1 — Issuer	|	0–3	|	6–8	|	~21	|	High — standalone credible
2 — Wallet + delivery	|	3–9	|	8–10	|	~54	|	High — learners can actually use them
3 — CLR + enterprise	|	9–15	|	10–12	|	~66	|	Medium-high — the enterprise wedge
4 — Verification API	|	12–18	|	6–8	|	~42	|	Medium — option value on the agent wave
5 — Ecosystem	|	15–24	|	6–8	|	~63	|	Medium-high — where demand is realized
Total (overlapping phases)	|	~245 eng-months	|	≈ 20 engineer-years


The sequencing argument in one paragraph
Phases 1 and 2 create value with or without anything after them: learners get portable credentials and Coursera gets standards credibility with university partners. Phase 3 is where the money is, because the enterprise workforce record is a new budget line rather than a feature. Phase 4 is an option on the agent wave — cheap to buy, and worth buying precisely because it is cheap. Phase 5 is where demand is realized and is the phase most dependent on parties outside Coursera's control, which is why it comes last despite being the most important.


Organizational changes
----------------------



    New function
    Credential Operations
    Owns schema governance, tier assignment, revocation decisions, and issuance-failure triage. Closest analogue is a university registrar. 3–5 people, not engineers. The most commonly omitted line in plans like this.


    Existing team
    Security — key custody
    Signing keys are a new class of asset: compromise means forged Coursera credentials in the wild. Needs an owner, an audit cadence, dual control, and a written compromise runbook before Phase 1 ships.


    Existing team
    Legal & policy
    Revocation policy, GDPR/FERPA posture, cross-border recognition, and the standing question of what Coursera warrants when it signs a statement about a person.


    Existing team
    Academic integrity
    Owns the T1–T4 taxonomy and defends it against internal pressure to upgrade tiers. If this sits under marketing, the tier is worthless within two quarters.



Kill criteria — write these down before starting
A program that cannot be falsified will run forever on narrative. Set these at the outset and hold to them:

  * After Phase 2: if fewer than 5% of eligible learners claim a credential into any wallet within 90 days of eligibility, the learner demand hypothesis is wrong. Stop and reconsider — do not fund Phase 3 to fix a demand problem with more features.

  * After Phase 3: if no enterprise customer will pay for the workforce skills record, the enterprise wedge is wrong. That was the strongest commercial hypothesis; its failure is disqualifying, not a signal to build harder.

  * After Phase 4: if paid enrichment verifications are below a few thousand per day, the agent thesis has not arrived yet. Keep the free tier running — it is cheap and it is strategically correct — and shelve the metering.

  * At any point: if a neutral utility becomes the de facto standard container and Coursera's differentiated fields are not representable in it, revisit build-versus-partner immediately rather than at the next planning cycle.


Bring it home — if you only get funding for one thing
Fund Phase 1, and inside Phase 1 fund the alignment and assessment-tier work above everything else.
That is a small data-and-schema project, not a platform. It produces credentials that are machine-comparable and honestly graded — which is the only asset in this entire course that competitors cannot copy by buying a vendor. The wallet, the API, and the ecosystem work are all replaceable later. Assessment provenance emitted at issuance time is not: every credential issued without it is permanently impoverished, because you cannot retroactively add fields to a signed document without reissuing it.
That last sentence is the real deadline. Every month of issuance without these fields is a month of credentials that will need reissuing to ever carry them.


What would make you argue for buying rather than building?
If two things were true simultaneously, buying would be right: (a) Coursera's assessment data is not actually rich enough to populate a meaningful integrity tier, and (b) partner-driven demand for OB 3.0 issuance is arriving faster than a 3-month build can serve.
In that world, license Credly or Accredible, ship compliant badges next quarter, and treat issuance as procurement. The tell would be discovering during Phase 1 discovery that assessment metadata is inconsistent, unavailable, or not trustworthy across the catalog — which is a real possibility worth testing in the first two weeks rather than assuming away.
The hybrid most large issuers land on stays available either way: build the pipeline for flagship credentials where provenance is the point, buy for the long tail where a plain badge is genuinely sufficient. That also gives you a live interoperability test, since your credentials and the vendor's must both verify in the same wallet.


Q: What is the roadmap's biggest departure from the conventional plan, and why?  * Skipping CLR 2.0 entirely in favor of individual badges
  * Not leading with a native mobile wallet — ship a custodial web wallet plus OID4VCI export instead, and make the native-app call a data-driven Phase 4 decision (correct)
  * Building the verification API before the issuance pipeline
  * Outsourcing issuance to Credly in Phase 1
Explanation: A native wallet is a permanent product line — 3–4 engineers steady-state, two app stores, OS churn, a protocol treadmill — competing against Apple, Google, and EUDI national wallets that all 27 EU states must ship by December 2026. A custodial web wallet plus standards-compliant export takes weeks instead of quarters and converts the native-app bet into an instrumented decision.

Q: Which organizational addition is most commonly omitted from plans like this?  * A dedicated mobile engineering team
  * A Credential Operations function — schema governance, tier assignment, revocation decisions, issuance-failure triage — roughly 3–5 non-engineers, closest to a university registrar (correct)
  * A blockchain infrastructure team
  * A dedicated standards-body liaison
Explanation: Plans routinely fund the engineering and forget the registrar-equivalent function that governs schemas, assigns tiers, decides revocations, and triages issuance failures. Related and equally load-bearing: the assessment tier taxonomy must sit under academic integrity, not marketing, or it will be worthless within two quarters of internal lobbying.

Q: If Coursera could fund only one piece of work, which should it be?  * The wallet app, since learners need somewhere to store credentials
  * The verification API, since verifiers are the scarce resource
  * The alignment and assessment-tier fields inside Phase 1 issuance (correct)
  * 1EdTech certification, since it unblocks procurement
Explanation: It is a small data-and-schema project that produces machine-comparable, honestly graded credentials — the one asset competitors cannot copy by buying a vendor. It is also the only irreversible one: you cannot retroactively add fields to a signed document without reissuing, so every month of issuance without them creates credentials that are permanently impoverished.

Q: What is the stated kill criterion after Phase 2?  * If no enterprise will pay for the workforce skills record
  * If fewer than 5% of eligible learners claim a credential into any wallet within 90 days, the learner demand hypothesis is wrong — stop rather than funding Phase 3 to fix demand with features (correct)
  * If paid enrichment verifications fall below a few thousand per day
  * If a neutral utility becomes the default container
Explanation: Each phase has its own falsification test. Phase 2's tests learner demand; the enterprise-payment test belongs to Phase 3 and the verification-volume test to Phase 4. The discipline being enforced is not adding features to fix a demand problem — a program that cannot be falsified runs forever on narrative.

  * The five phases — P1 (0–3mo) Become an excellent issuer. P2 (3–9mo) Lightweight custodial web wallet + OID4VCI/VP delivery. P3 (9–15mo) CLR 2.0 + enterprise workforce record. P4 (12–18mo) Verification API + enrichment + x402. P5 (15–24mo) ATS distribution and ecosystem. Roughly 245 eng-months total, ~20 engineer-years.
  * Phase 1 exit criteria — A third party verifies a Coursera credential using only published standards and a library they did not get from Coursera. That single test proves did:web publication, signing, schema conformance, status lists, and openness all work.
  * Why Phase 3 is where the money is — The enterprise workforce skills record — CLRs an enterprise holds across its own workforce, exportable to HRIS, re-verifiable without a Coursera dashboard — is a new budget line (compliance, workforce planning, M&A diligence) rather than a feature of L&D spend. And it outlives the subscription.
  * The four organizational changes — New: Credential Operations (3–5 non-engineers, registrar-equivalent). Existing: Security owns key custody with dual control and a compromise runbook before Phase 1 ships. Legal owns revocation policy and GDPR/FERPA posture. Academic integrity owns the T1–T4 taxonomy and defends it from internal upgrade pressure.
  * The four kill criteria — P2: <5% of eligible learners claim within 90 days → learner demand hypothesis wrong. P3: no enterprise pays for the workforce record → the strongest commercial hypothesis failed, disqualifying. P4: paid enrichment below a few thousand/day → agent thesis hasn't arrived; keep the free tier, shelve metering. Anytime: a neutral container wins and can't represent your differentiated fields → revisit build-vs-partner now.
  * The real deadline — You cannot retroactively add fields to a signed document without reissuing it. Every month of issuance without alignment and assessment-tier fields produces credentials that are permanently impoverished. That makes schema completeness urgent in a way the wallet and API never are.






------------------------------
Module 11: Technical Deep Dive
------------------------------




The parts that decide whether an implementation works: securing mechanisms, DID methods, proof formats, status lists, and the lifecycle fields everyone forgets until a credential expires in production.


Two securing mechanisms, one data model
---------------------------------------


A VC 2.0 credential can be secured two ways, and a verifier must handle whichever the issuer chose. This is the single most consequential implementation decision in the stack.


	|	Data Integrity (JSON-LD native)	|	VC-JOSE-COSE (JWT / SD-JWT)
Shape	|	Credential JSON with an embedded proof	|	Credential as a JWT payload; signature in the JWS
Canonicalization	|	Required (RDFC-1.0) — expensive	|	None — sign the bytes
Throughput	|	Canonicalization-bound	|	Signature-bound (much faster)
Selective disclosure	|	ecdsa-sd-2023, bbs-2023	|	SD-JWT (RFC 9901)
Unlinkability	|	Possible with BBS+	|	No — signature is constant
Multiple signatures	|	Natural — several proofs on one document	|	Awkward
Ecosystem pull	|	1EdTech, DCC, education tooling	|	EUDI, mDL, OID4VC, mobile wallets
Debuggability	|	Readable JSON	|	Base64 blob until decoded


The recommendation, and the reason it is uncomfortable
Support both. Default to Data Integrity for education-ecosystem interoperability; use JWT/SD-JWT for bulk issuance and mobile-wallet delivery.
This is genuinely more work and I would normally argue against dual paths. Here it is warranted because the two ecosystems have not converged and neither is going away: 1EdTech and university tooling expect Data Integrity JSON-LD, while EUDI, mDL, and the mobile-wallet world are JOSE-native. Picking one forecloses a market.
Mitigate the cost by keeping the signing service format-agnostic — it takes a validated claim set and a target format, and everything upstream is shared. The dual path then lives in one small, well-tested component rather than spreading through the pipeline.


The JWT form, concretely
------------------------


Decoded JWT header and payload for the same credential

---code---
// Header
{
  "alg": "EdDSA",
  "typ": "vc+jwt",
  "kid": "did:web:coursera.org#key-2026-01"
}

// Payload — the credential lives under "vc"
{
  "iss": "did:web:coursera.org",
  "sub": "did:key:z6MkhaXgBZ...",
  "nbf": 1785942120,
  "jti": "urn:uuid:9f2a4c81-...",
  "vc": {
    "@context": [
      "https://www.w3.org/ns/credentials/v2",
      "https://purl.imsglobal.org/spec/ob/v3p0/context-3.0.3.json"
    ],
    "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "OpenBadgeCredential"],
    "credentialSubject": { ... }
  }
}
---/code---


Note there is no proof member. The JWS signature is the proof, and kid points at the verification method in the issuer's DID document. A verifier that only knows how to look for proof will reject this as unsigned — a common and confusing interop failure.


Proof formats and cryptosuites
------------------------------


Cryptosuite / format	|	Curve	|	Selective disclosure	|	Unlinkable	|	Use for
eddsa-rdfc-2022	|	Ed25519	|	No	|	No	|	Default. Fast, small, widely supported
ecdsa-rdfc-2019	|	P-256 / P-384	|	No	|	No	|	FIPS / HSM environments requiring NIST curves
ecdsa-sd-2023	|	P-256	|	Yes	|	No	|	Selective disclosure on NIST curves
bbs-2023	|	BLS12-381	|	Yes	|	Yes	|	Privacy-sensitive credentials; still maturing
SD-JWT (RFC 9901)	|	Any JOSE alg	|	Yes	|	No	|	Mobile wallets, EUDI, OID4VC flows


Ed25519 is the right default: 64-byte signatures, fast verification, no curve-parameter footguns, and support in every relevant library. Move off it only for a specific reason — a FIPS requirement pushes you to P-256, and a genuine unlinkability requirement pushes you to BBS+ with the understanding that tooling is thinner.


How SD-JWT actually achieves selective disclosure
----------------------------------------


  1IssuerFor each selectively-disclosable claim, generate a random salt and compute hash(salt, claimName, claimValue).
  2IssuerPut only the hashes in the signed JWT payload under _sd. The plaintext values never appear in the signed body.
  3Issuer → HolderSend the JWT plus the full set of disclosures (salt + name + value triples), one per hidden claim.
  4HolderTo reveal a subset, present the JWT plus only the disclosures for claims being revealed. Withheld disclosures are simply not sent.
  5VerifierVerify the JWT signature, then re-hash each provided disclosure and confirm it appears in _sd. Revealed claims are proven; hidden ones are unknowable.


Elegant, cheap, and it explains the linkability limitation precisely: the JWT signature is identical across every presentation, so two verifiers comparing notes can tell they saw the same credential even if they saw different fields.


Bitstring Status List mechanics
-------------------------------


The status list is itself a Verifiable Credential

---code---
{
  "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/ns/credentials/v2"],
  "id": "https://credentials.coursera.org/status/3",
  "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "BitstringStatusListCredential"],
  "issuer": "did:web:coursera.org",
  "validFrom": "2026-08-05T00:00:00Z",
  "credentialSubject": {
    "id": "https://credentials.coursera.org/status/3#list",
    "type": "BitstringStatusList",
    "statusPurpose": "revocation",
    "encodedList": "uH4sIAAAAAAAAA-3BMQEAAADCoPVPbQwfoAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIC3AYbSVKsAQAAA"
  },
  "proof": { ... }
}
---/code---


Mechanics and sizing:


  * The list is a GZIP-compressed, base64url-encoded bitstring. Minimum length is 131,072 entries (16 KB raw) — and because revocations are rare, the compressed payload is typically a couple of kilobytes.

  * Each credential carries its index in credentialStatus.statusListIndex. The verifier decompresses and reads one bit.

  * statusPurpose distinguishes revocation from suspension. Revocation is permanent; suspension is reversible. Different lists, different semantics — a suspended credential can come back.

  * The status list is itself signed, so a verifier can confirm the revocation data genuinely came from the issuer rather than an attacker who intercepted the fetch.


Status list operational rules

  * Serve from a CDN with a short cache TTL (minutes). Long TTLs delay revocation propagation; no cache means you serve the fetch volume of every verification on earth.

  * Do not log requests. Herd privacy is the property being purchased; access logs are how you accidentally sell it back.

  * Keep lists large and well-mixed. One list per course shrinks the anonymity set until the herd stops helping — the fetch itself reveals which course is being checked.

  * Pre-allocate index ranges per worker during batch issuance so allocation never contends.

  * Never reuse an index. Ever. Reuse silently transfers one credential's revocation state to another.


Credential refresh and expiration
---------------------------------


Field	|	Meaning	|	Guidance for education credentials
validFrom	|	When the credential becomes valid	|	Issuance timestamp. On backfill this is today, not the original completion date.
validUntil	|	When it stops being valid	|	Usually omit. A completed course does not un-complete.
awardedDate (on the subject)	|	When the achievement occurred	|	The real completion date. This is what a human cares about.
refreshService	|	Where to obtain a fresh credential	|	Useful for renewable certifications and for credentials signed with a retired key.


Do not set expirations you do not mean
The instinct to set validUntil two years out "to be safe" is wrong and expensive. A course completion is a historical fact; it does not decay. An expired credential reads to a verifier as invalid, not as old, and at Coursera's volume that means millions of legitimate credentials silently failing verification on a rolling basis, with no event to alert anyone.
Expire only what genuinely expires: time-boxed certifications, credentials tied to a product version, credentials with a regulatory renewal cycle. For everything else, let recency be a signal the verifier weighs via awardedDate rather than a cliff you impose. Module 6 makes recency an exposed signal precisely so it does not have to be an expiration.


A verifier, end to end
----------------------


TypeScript — the shape of the checks (library calls elided)

---code---
async function verifyPresentation(vp: object, opts: VerifyOptions) {
  const checks: Record = {};
  const warnings: string[] = [];

  // 1. Presentation signature + replay protection.  DO NOT SKIP.
  const holderDid = getHolder(vp);
  const holderDoc = await resolveDid(holderDid);
  if (!(await verifyProof(vp, holderDoc))) throw new Error("bad presentation signature");
  if (getChallenge(vp) !== opts.challenge) throw new Error("nonce mismatch");
  if (getDomain(vp) !== opts.domain)       throw new Error("domain mismatch");
  checks.presentationSignature = "valid";

  for (const vc of getCredentials(vp)) {
    // 2. Holder binding — the credential must be about the presenter.
    if (vc.credentialSubject.id !== holderDid) throw new Error("holder binding failed");

    // 3. Resolve issuer and verify the credential signature.
    const issuerDid = typeof vc.issuer === "string" ? vc.issuer : vc.issuer.id;
    const issuerDoc = await resolveDid(issuerDid);          // cached for hours
    const vm = findVerificationMethod(issuerDoc, proofKeyId(vc));
    if (!vm) throw new Error("unknown verification method");
    if (!(await verifyProof(vc, vm))) throw new Error("bad credential signature");

    // A retired key is a WARNING, not a failure — historical credentials
    // stay valid, which is exactly why retired keys are never deleted.
    if (isRetired(vm)) warnings.push(`signed with retired key ${vm.id}`);

    // 4. Revocation — one fetch covers ~131k credentials.
    if (vc.credentialStatus && await isRevoked(vc.credentialStatus)) {
      throw new Error("credential revoked");
    }

    // 5. Validity window and schema.
    assertValidityWindow(vc);
    assertSchema(vc);
  }

  // 6. Issuer trust — POLICY, not cryptography. Yours to define.
  //    Everything above is mechanical; this line is the actual decision.
  return { verified: true, checks, warnings, trustDecision: opts.trustPolicy(vp) };
}
---/code---


Why is JSON-LD canonicalization so expensive, and can we avoid it?
Data Integrity proofs sign a canonical form of the graph, not the JSON bytes, so that semantically identical documents produce identical signatures regardless of key order or formatting. Producing that form means parsing JSON-LD, expanding every term against its @context, converting to RDF quads, and running RDFC-1.0 — which includes a deterministic labelling step for blank nodes that can be genuinely costly on complex graphs.
Three ways to avoid the pain. Pin contexts locally so expansion never hits the network — mandatory for both performance and security, since a remote context is remote code execution over your semantics. Keep credential graphs shallow, avoiding deeply nested blank-node structures. Or use JWT securing, which skips canonicalization entirely by signing the serialized bytes — at the cost of the JSON-LD-native properties and BBS+ compatibility.
For bulk backfill specifically, JWT securing turns a multi-week job into a multi-day one. That is a strong enough argument to make backfill JWT-secured even if forward issuance stays Data Integrity.


Q: A verifier receives a credential as a JWT with typ 'vc+jwt' and finds no 'proof' member. What is the correct interpretation?  * The credential is unsigned and must be rejected
  * The JWS signature is the proof — this is VC-JOSE-COSE securing, and kid points to the verification method in the issuer's DID document (correct)
  * The proof was stripped in transit, indicating tampering
  * Only Data Integrity proofs are valid under VC 2.0
Explanation: VC 2.0 defines two securing mechanisms. Data Integrity embeds a proof member; VC-JOSE-COSE wraps the credential in a JWT where the JWS signature is the proof. A verifier that only looks for a proof member will reject perfectly valid credentials — a common and confusing interop failure.

Q: Why does SD-JWT provide selective disclosure but not unlinkability?  * The salts are reused across presentations
  * The JWT signature is identical in every presentation, so two verifiers comparing notes can tell they saw the same credential even if they saw different fields (correct)
  * Disclosures contain the holder's DID
  * SD-JWT reveals the total number of hidden claims
Explanation: The issuer signs hashes of salted claims; the holder reveals a subset by sending only the matching disclosures. That hides values effectively, but the signature over the payload never changes. BBS+ solves this by deriving a fresh zero-knowledge proof each time, which is why it is the only unlinkable option — and why it is still maturing.

Q: Which status list operational rule protects the herd-privacy property?  * Serving the list with a long cache TTL
  * Not logging requests, and keeping lists large and well-mixed rather than one per course (correct)
  * Signing the status list credential
  * Pre-allocating index ranges per worker
Explanation: Herd privacy means the issuer learns someone checked list #3, not which of ~131,000 credentials. Access logs sell that back, and a per-course list shrinks the anonymity set until the fetch itself reveals which course is being checked. Signing the list and pre-allocating indexes are correct but address integrity and throughput, not privacy.

Q: Why should most Coursera credentials omit validUntil?  * The VC 2.0 specification discourages expiration dates
  * A completed course is a historical fact that does not decay, and an expired credential reads as invalid rather than old — silently failing millions of legitimate credentials with no alerting event (correct)
  * Expiration is incompatible with bitstring status lists
  * Verifiers ignore validUntil in practice
Explanation: Setting validUntil 'to be safe' creates a rolling wave of legitimate credentials failing verification with nothing to alert on. Expire only what genuinely expires — time-boxed certifications, version-tied credentials, regulatory renewal cycles. For everything else expose awardedDate and let recency be a signal the verifier weighs rather than a cliff you impose.

Q: What makes JSON-LD canonicalization expensive, and what is the mandatory mitigation?  * Signature computation over large graphs; mitigate by using smaller keys
  * Expanding terms against @context and running RDFC-1.0 with deterministic blank-node labelling; pin contexts locally so expansion never hits the network (correct)
  * Base64 encoding overhead; mitigate with compression
  * Schema validation against remote JSON Schema files; mitigate by caching schemas
Explanation: Data Integrity signs a canonical graph form, not the JSON bytes, so identical semantics yield identical signatures. Pinning contexts locally is mandatory for performance and for security — a remote context is effectively remote code execution over your semantics. For bulk backfill, JWT securing skips canonicalization entirely and turns a multi-week job into a multi-day one.

  * The two securing mechanisms — Data Integrity (embedded proof, JSON-LD canonicalization required, supports BBS+ unlinkability, favored by 1EdTech/education tooling) vs VC-JOSE-COSE (JWT/SD-JWT, no canonicalization, much faster, favored by EUDI/mDL/OID4VC/mobile wallets). Support both; keep the signing service format-agnostic so the dual path lives in one component.
  * Cryptosuite defaults — eddsa-rdfc-2022 (Ed25519) is the right default — 64-byte signatures, fast, no curve footguns, universal support. ecdsa-rdfc-2019 (P-256) for FIPS/HSM. ecdsa-sd-2023 for selective disclosure on NIST curves. bbs-2023 (BLS12-381) for unlinkability, still maturing. SD-JWT for mobile/EUDI/OID4VC.
  * How SD-JWT works in five steps — Issuer salts and hashes each disclosable claim → puts only hashes in the signed payload under _sd → sends JWT plus all disclosures (salt+name+value) → holder presents JWT plus only the disclosures being revealed → verifier re-hashes each disclosure and confirms it appears in _sd. Hidden claims are unknowable; the signature never changes, hence linkability.
  * Bitstring Status List sizing and semantics — GZIP-compressed base64url bitstring, minimum 131,072 entries (16 KB raw, ~2 KB compressed since revocations are rare). Each credential carries its index. statusPurpose distinguishes permanent revocation from reversible suspension. The list is itself a signed VC, so verifiers can trust the revocation data.
  * Five status list operational rules — CDN with short (minutes) TTL — long delays revocation, none serves the world's fetch volume. Don't log requests (that's selling back herd privacy). Keep lists large and well-mixed, never one per course. Pre-allocate index ranges per worker. Never reuse an index — it silently transfers revocation state.
  * The four lifecycle date fields — validFrom = when the credential became valid (on backfill: today). validUntil = usually omit; a completed course doesn't un-complete. awardedDate on the subject = the real completion date, what humans care about. refreshService = where to get a fresh credential, useful for renewable certs and retired-key reissuance.
  * Retired key = warning, not failure — A credential signed with a key that has since been retired is still valid — that's exactly why retired verification methods are never deleted from the DID document. A verifier should surface it as a warning. Collapsing warnings into failures makes verifiers reject legitimate credentials en masse.






-------------------------------
Module 12: Privacy & Compliance
-------------------------------




Learner-held credentials improve the privacy posture on almost every axis — and create two genuinely new problems that the architecture makes harder, not easier.


Scope note
This module is an engineering-oriented analysis of where the legal questions land in the architecture, not legal advice. Every position below needs review by counsel with the actual facts of Coursera's data-processing arrangements, and several turn on contractual details no external analysis can see.


GDPR: better on most axes, genuinely harder on one
----------------------------------------


GDPR principle	|	Today (issuer-hosted)	|	With verifiable credentials
Data minimisation (Art. 5)	|	Verification page reveals whatever the page shows	|	Better — selective disclosure reveals only requested fields
Purpose limitation	|	Issuer sees every verification and could repurpose it	|	Better — the issuer is not in the transaction
Data portability (Art. 20)	|	Export produces a PDF	|	Much better — machine-readable, interoperable, a live artifact
Right of access (Art. 15)	|	Subject access request to the issuer	|	Better — the learner already holds the data
Right to erasure (Art. 17)	|	Delete the database row	|	Harder — you cannot delete a copy someone else holds
Correlation risk	|	Bounded — the issuer is the only observer	|	New risk — a static DID is a cross-verifier identifier


The erasure paradox, resolved


An issued credential is a signed document in the learner's possession, possibly copied to verifiers. Coursera cannot reach into a wallet and delete it. So what does erasure mean?


The four-part answer

  13. Delete Coursera's copy and the issuance record — that is the personal data Coursera controls, and erasure applies to it fully.

  14. Revoke via the status list so any future verification fails. The credential becomes inert even where it exists.

  15. Recognise that the learner's own copy is theirs. A learner holding a document about themselves is not Coursera processing their data; erasure rights run against controllers, not against the data subject's own records.

  16. Verifier copies are the verifier's responsibility — they are a separate controller with their own retention obligations, exactly as they are today for a PDF someone emailed them.


This is a defensible position and materially better than the status quo, where a PDF emailed to fifty employers is equally unreachable and has no revocation mechanism at all.


The residual issue counsel will find
The status list creates an ongoing processing relationship after erasure. To keep a revoked credential revoked, Coursera must keep publishing a bitstring in which that learner's index is set — which means retaining an index-to-learner mapping, which is personal data, after being asked to erase it.
Two mitigations, and neither is free. Keep the mapping in a separate minimal store with its own retention basis (legal obligation / legitimate interest in credential integrity), holding only the index and a hash rather than learner details. Or accept un-revocation on erasure — delete the mapping, let the bit stay set with no way to explain why, and document that the revocation is permanent and unattributable. Decide this deliberately in Phase 1 rather than discovering it in a Phase 3 audit.


FERPA: verifiable credentials are close to the ideal case
----------------------------------------


FERPA governs education records at US institutions receiving federal funding. Coursera's own position varies by product line — direct-to-consumer courses are generally not FERPA-covered, while degree programs delivered with university partners typically are, with Coursera acting under the school-official exception. That distinction should be settled per product line before Phase 1, because it changes who may authorize disclosure.

Where the architecture helps, the help is structural rather than incidental:


  * Disclosure becomes learner-initiated by construction. FERPA's core mechanism is consent for disclosure of education records. A VC presentation is a consent event: the learner chose to present, to a named verifier, at a specific time. That maps to FERPA's model more cleanly than any consent checkbox.

  * Selective disclosure is data minimisation for records. Sharing a credential rather than a transcript discloses less by default.

  * The audit trail lives in the right place. The wallet can log every presentation for the learner, giving them a record of who they shared with — which is closer to FERPA's spirit than an institutional log the learner cannot see.


The FERPA trap in the enterprise product
The Coursera for Business workforce skills record from Module 10 sits in a different position from a learner sharing their own credential. If an employer sponsors a learner in a FERPA-covered program and receives a CLR about that learner, that is disclosure to a third party and needs a consent basis independent of the employment relationship.
Design implication: the enterprise record must be built on learner-consented presentations, not on issuer-side data export. Those two produce a superficially identical dashboard and are legally very different objects. Build the consented path first even though the export path is easier — retrofitting consent into a shipped enterprise feature is far worse than designing for it.


Correlation: the new risk the architecture creates
----------------------------------------


A learner presenting the same did:key to every verifier has handed out a persistent, unique, cross-context identifier — effectively a cookie that cannot be cleared and that they cannot see.


Mitigation	|	How it works	|	Cost
Pairwise DIDs	|	A distinct subject DID per verifier relationship	|	Credentials are bound to one subject DID, so this needs per-relationship issuance or re-binding — substantial
BBS+ derived proofs	|	Fresh unlinkable proof per presentation	|	Cryptosuite and library maturity; an L1 decision made at issuance
Batch issuance of single-use credentials	|	Issue N copies with distinct identifiers; use each once	|	Storage and issuance overhead; refresh logistics
Accept it, disclose it	|	Document that presentations are correlatable	|	Free — and honest, which counts for more than it seems


The proportionate position
For employment credentials, correlation is largely a non-issue: the learner is deliberately presenting under their real name to a named employer. They have already told the verifier who they are — a stable DID adds little.
Correlation matters intensely for two cases: anonymous or pseudonymous skill marketplaces, and credentials touching protected categories — disability accommodations, recovery-program completions, credentials revealing immigration or veteran status.
Recommendation: accept correlation for ordinary course credentials and say so plainly in the privacy documentation. If Coursera ever issues credentials in a sensitive category, that class needs BBS+ from day one — because as Module 2 established, the securing decision is effectively irreversible once credentials are issued at scale.


Cross-border portability
------------------------


  * The credential itself crosses borders trivially — it is a signed document verified against a public key, with no data transfer to a third country in the GDPR sense when a learner presents their own credential to a foreign verifier.

  * EU recognition runs through EDC/ELM. Mapping Coursera achievements into the European Learning Model is what makes them describable in EU frameworks, and the December 2026 EUDI mandate makes this a dated requirement rather than an aspiration.

  * The issuer-side data — the completion record, the issuance log — remains subject to ordinary transfer rules and is unaffected by any of this.

  * Trust does not cross borders automatically. A European verifier may not recognize did:web:coursera.org as an accredited issuer, which is the trust-registry gap from Module 2 wearing a jurisdictional hat. National accreditation registries are the emerging answer, and they are not interoperable yet.


Accessibility and the equity question
-------------------------------------


The learner without a smartphone
A wallet-first architecture quietly assumes a modern smartphone with hardware-backed key storage, reliable connectivity, and app-store access. For a global learner base that assumption excludes real people — often exactly the learners for whom a portable credential would matter most.
Requirements that follow: the web wallet must be fully functional on low-end devices and slow connections; a downloadable credential file must work with no wallet at all; the hosted verification page must remain available indefinitely as the universal fallback; and none of these should be presented as a degraded tier.
This is not a footnote. If verifiable credentials become the high-trust path and they require hardware most of the world does not have, the technology has widened a gap rather than closed one — which would be a genuinely bad outcome for a mission-driven education platform, and one that is entirely foreseeable now.


The revocation policy question
------------------------------


Technical revocation is easy. The policy is not, and it must be written before the first credential is signed:


  * Academic integrity violation discovered after issuance — revoke. Clear case.

  * Issuance error (wrong course, wrong learner, wrong tier) — revoke and reissue correctly.

  * Course later found to be substandard — do not revoke. The learner did the work in good faith. Deprecate the achievement definition instead so no new credentials are issued.

  * Partner relationship ends — do not revoke. The achievement happened. Nothing about it became false.

  * Learner requests deletion — revoke plus erase Coursera's copy, subject to the status-list retention question above.

  * Legal order — revoke, and publish transparency reporting on the aggregate.


Bring it home — the principle that keeps revocation trustworthy
Revocation is for statements that were never true, or are no longer true. It is not a business lever.
The moment credentials are revoked because a partnership soured, a product was sunset, or a learner stopped paying, the signature stops meaning "this is true" and starts meaning "Coursera currently endorses this." Those are entirely different products, and the second one is worth far less — because a verifier can no longer treat a valid signature as evidence about the learner.
Write the revocation policy in Phase 1, publish it, and treat it as a commitment to the ecosystem rather than an internal runbook. It is the cheapest credibility Coursera can buy in this space, and one visible violation would cost more than the entire program.


Does issuing verifiable credentials make Coursera a data controller in new ways?
For the issuance itself, no — Coursera already processes completion data as a controller, and signing a statement about it is a new format for existing processing, not a new purpose.
Two genuinely new positions do arise. First, the status list is ongoing processing: publishing a bitstring keyed to learner-specific indexes continues indefinitely, including after an erasure request, which is the residual issue flagged above. Second, if Coursera operates a custodial wallet, it becomes a processor (arguably a controller) for credentials issued by other parties that learners store there — a materially different and larger obligation than issuing your own.
That second point is an underrated argument for the Module 4 recommendation. A custodial wallet holding third-party credentials means accepting controller-ish obligations over data Coursera did not create and cannot validate. Export-first architecture keeps that surface small, which is a compliance benefit on top of the cost and strategy arguments already made.


Q: How is the GDPR right to erasure satisfied for a credential already in a learner's wallet?  * The issuer sends a deletion command to the wallet over DIDComm
  * Delete Coursera's copy and issuance record, revoke via the status list, recognize the learner's own copy as theirs, and treat verifier copies as the verifier's controller obligation (correct)
  * Erasure does not apply to verifiable credentials
  * The credential's validUntil is set to the current time
Explanation: Erasure rights run against controllers, not against a data subject's own records — a learner holding a document about themselves is not Coursera processing their data. Revocation makes the credential inert wherever it exists. This is materially better than a PDF emailed to fifty employers, which is equally unreachable and has no revocation mechanism at all.

Q: What residual GDPR problem does the status list create?  * It publishes learner names in a public bitstring
  * Keeping a revoked credential revoked requires retaining an index-to-learner mapping indefinitely — ongoing processing that persists after an erasure request (correct)
  * Status lists cannot be hosted in the EU
  * Verifiers can enumerate all revoked credentials
Explanation: The bitstring itself contains no learner data, but the mapping needed to keep the right bit set is personal data retained after erasure. Mitigations: a separate minimal store holding only index and hash under its own retention basis, or accepting un-revocation on erasure and documenting it. Decide deliberately in Phase 1, not in a Phase 3 audit.

Q: Why must the Coursera for Business workforce skills record be built on learner-consented presentations rather than issuer-side data export?  * Data export is technically harder at enterprise scale
  * An employer receiving a CLR about a sponsored learner in a FERPA-covered program is third-party disclosure needing a consent basis independent of employment (correct)
  * Exported data cannot be cryptographically signed
  * GDPR prohibits bulk data export to enterprises
Explanation: The two paths produce a superficially identical dashboard and are legally very different objects. A VC presentation is itself a consent event — the learner chose to present, to a named verifier, at a specific time — which maps to FERPA's model cleanly. Retrofitting consent into a shipped enterprise feature is far worse than designing for it.

Q: What is the recommended position on DID correlation for ordinary course credentials?  * Implement pairwise DIDs for every verifier relationship from day one
  * Accept correlation and disclose it plainly — the learner is already presenting under their real name to a named employer — but use BBS+ from day one for any sensitive-category credentials (correct)
  * Issue batches of single-use credentials for every learner
  * Use BBS+ universally regardless of credential type
Explanation: For employment credentials the learner has already told the verifier who they are, so a stable DID adds little. Correlation matters intensely for anonymous skill marketplaces and credentials touching protected categories — disability accommodations, recovery programs, immigration or veteran status. Since the securing decision is effectively irreversible at scale, sensitive classes need BBS+ from the start.

Q: Which scenario should NOT trigger revocation?  * An academic integrity violation discovered after issuance
  * An issuance error assigning the wrong course or tier
  * A partner relationship ending, or a course later judged substandard (correct)
  * A valid legal order
Explanation: Revocation is for statements that were never true or are no longer true — not a business lever. The learner did the work in good faith and nothing about the achievement became false. Deprecate the achievement definition so no new credentials issue. Revoking for business reasons changes the signature's meaning from 'this is true' to 'Coursera currently endorses this,' which is worth far less.

  * GDPR scorecard for VCs — Better: data minimisation (selective disclosure), purpose limitation (issuer not in the transaction), portability (machine-readable), access (learner already holds it). Harder: erasure (can't delete someone else's copy). New: correlation risk from a static DID acting as an uncleanable cross-verifier cookie.
  * The erasure paradox, four-part answer — (1) Delete Coursera's copy and issuance record. (2) Revoke via status list so future verification fails. (3) The learner's own copy is theirs — erasure runs against controllers, not the data subject. (4) Verifier copies are the verifier's own controller obligation, same as a PDF today.
  * Why FERPA fits VCs unusually well — Disclosure becomes learner-initiated by construction — a presentation IS a consent event, naming the verifier and the time. Selective disclosure is record-level data minimisation. The audit trail lives in the learner's wallet where they can see it, rather than in an institutional log they cannot.
  * The FERPA trap in the enterprise product — An employer receiving a CLR about a sponsored learner in a FERPA-covered program is third-party disclosure requiring a consent basis independent of employment. Build the workforce record on learner-consented presentations, not issuer-side export — identical dashboard, very different legal object.
  * The accessibility requirement — Wallet-first assumes a modern smartphone with hardware-backed keys and app-store access — excluding exactly the learners for whom portable credentials matter most. The web wallet must work on low-end devices and slow connections, a downloadable file must work with no wallet, and the hosted verification page must persist indefinitely. Not a degraded tier.
  * The revocation principle — Revocation is for statements that were never true or are no longer true — never a business lever. Revoke for integrity violations, issuance errors, learner request, legal order. Do NOT revoke for a soured partnership or a course later judged substandard. Publish the policy in Phase 1 as an ecosystem commitment.
  * The hidden compliance cost of a custodial wallet — Operating a custodial wallet makes Coursera a processor (arguably controller) for credentials issued by OTHER parties that learners store there — obligations over data Coursera didn't create and can't validate. Export-first architecture keeps that surface small: a compliance argument on top of the cost and strategy ones.






-------------------------------------
Module ★: Resources & Primary Sources
-------------------------------------





Specifications
--------------


  * W3C Verifiable Credentials Data Model v2.0 — Recommendation, 15 May 2025

  * W3C Verifiable Credentials Overview — the best single orientation to the seven-spec family

  * W3C press release — VC 2.0 published as a standard

  * 1EdTech Open Badges 3.0 specification and the implementation guide

  * 1EdTech Open Badges overview · CLR & Open Badges FAQ

  * 1EdTech — Connecting the Dots: making sense of digital credential standards

  * Open Badges 3.0 certification guide


Wallets and reference implementations
-------------------------------------


  * Learner Credential Wallet — OpenWallet Foundation Labs (iOS + Android, open source)

  * MIT Open Learning — DCC transfers LCW stewardship to the OpenWallet Foundation

  * MIT Learn — What is the DCC and Open Badges 3.0?

  * ASU Pocket — a digital wallet for real-time achievements

  * ASU — how the Trusted Learner Network and ASU Pocket put privacy first

  * ASU Pocket open beta announcement


Market research and primary data
--------------------------------


  * Coursera Micro-Credentials Impact Report 2026 — the 94% / 92% / 86% figures

  * Credential Engine — Counting Credentials 2025 (December 2025)

  * Counting Credentials 2025 full report (PDF)

  * WCET — 1.85 million credentials and counting


Ecosystem and policy
--------------------


  * Velocity Network Foundation — the Internet of Careers

  * Credential Engine's profile of Velocity Network

  * US DOE — $15M Connecting Talent to Opportunity Challenge launch

  * US DOE — Challenge semifinalists announced

  * European Digital Credentials for Learning (Europass)

  * Europass — how to receive and use a European Digital Credential

  * EUDI Wallet Hub — eIDAS 2, use cases, standards

  * Credly — support for Open Badges 3.0 · 1EdTech certification listing

  * Google Cloud Credential Wallet announcement


Protocols and cryptography
--------------------------


  * OpenID for Verifiable Credential Issuance — developer overview

  * OpenID4VC explained — OID4VCI, OID4VP, SIOPv2

  * Digital Credentials API in browsers (2026 status)

  * OpenID VC interoperability testing results


Related courses in this collection
----------------------------------


  * Cloudflare Wallets — the payments half of Module 7: x402 on the wire, Account vs Virtual Wallets, the Monetization Gateway

  * Cloudflare for Developers — Workers, KV, R2, and the edge platform the verification API would run on

  * AI-Native Learning — the assessment and pedagogy side of what a credential should attest to

  * Instructure — Canvas Credentials and the LMS flank from Module 9


The five sentences to remember

  17. A traditional credential is a pointer to a database row the issuer controls; a verifiable credential is a signed statement the learner controls.

  18. The specs stopped being the bottleneck in mid-2025 — what is missing is issuers at scale and verifiers who care.

  19. The wallet is not the product. Machine-readable assessment provenance is the product, and the wallet is how it travels.

  20. Basic verification must be free forever; charge for enrichment, never for the check.

  21. You cannot add fields to a signed document retroactively — so every month issued without alignment and an assessment tier is a month of permanently impoverished credentials.





  Skills Wallet Architecture — built for Mustafa Furniturewala, VP Engineering, Coursera · August 2026
  Standards status current as of August 2026. Engineering estimates are directional and outside-in. ← All courses
